[Music]
what is up everybody welcome to another
episode of conversations with tom i am
here with somebody i think you guys are
going to find deeply fascinating donald
hoffman
um donald welcome to the show thank you
very much tom it's a pleasure to be here
thanks for inviting me of course man
dude after so i did an interview with
annika harris she introduced me to some
of the concepts that we'll be talking
about today which are uh one crazier
than the next but super interesting but
before we dive into that give people a
super quick synopsis of who you are your
background all that good stuff
i'm a professor at the university of
california at irvine in the cognitive
science department i've been there since
1983 and so i study visual perception um
perception of objects and their their
colors and their shapes and their
emotions
and then for the last uh 20-30 years
i've been studying consciousness as well
and trying to develop a mathematical
model of consciousness and then studying
evolution and asking does evolution
shape our senses to see reality as it is
or not so those are sort of the big
topics i've been studying yes
a lot of this seems to go back to vision
and the way that we literally see things
and by the way don't and i don't know
how much you know about me or my
obsessions but i'm obsessed with the
movie the matrix yes and in your
dedication you i forget the names of the
three people but you said i offer you
the red pill
which i thought was pretty interesting
so
what in your world what is the red pill
what is the red pill waking us up to
right most of us believe
that we see
reality as it is when we look up and see
the moon
it's because there really is a moon and
it would exist even if there were no
observers to see the moon it would still
exist
and we don't
believe that we see all of reality no
one thinks that we see everything that
there is to see but we do believe that
we've been shaped by natural selection
to see those aspects of the truth that
we need to see to stay alive and so that
our perceptions of space and time
are giving us a genuine insight into a
real space and time
that would be there even if there were
no observers to perceive it
and also our perception of objects like
tables and chairs the moon
quarks and leptons and so forth that
these things would also exist
and have roughly the properties that we
see
even if there were no creatures
no observers to see them at all and
the red pill that i'm offering is to say
that
if you believe
evolution by natural selection
then the mathematics of natural
selection makes it very very clear
that the probability of zero that any
of the language that we use in our
perceptions the language of space and
time the language of shapes and objects
and position and momentum and colors and
so forth
is the wrong language to describe
objective reality whatever that reality
might be
it's not that we're getting the shape of
this table a little bit wrong or the
color's a little bit off it's that
no
description in the language of space and
time and objects and colors could ever
be be true
reality whatever it is can't be
described in that language if we buy
evolution by natural selection so we
have a choice between taking one of our
best confirmed scientific theories
seriously namely evolution by natural
selection or taking our intuitions that
space time is fundamental and objects
are fundamental taking that intuition
seriously and i decided to side with
this science on this one all right so
this a lot of this stuff is going to be
really difficult to tease out but i
think we have to sort of break it into
points i don't want to spend our whole
time um
describing the theory we may get lost
for a fair amount of time in that but i
what i hope we can do is sort of lay out
the thinking and then get into some of
the implications why it matters and all
that good stuff
so
if
i guess let's back up so
tell me how natural selection gives us
the mathematical model that invalidates
all that that's probably the right place
to start right most of us think of
natural selection and evolution as a
biological theory that that's that's
sort of intuitive right you know if you
are better adapted to the environment
you're more likely to pass on your genes
and so forth and
but it turns out that
in the 1970s uh a brilliant guy named
john maynard smith
was able to use the ideas of evolution
by natural selection and the tools of
mathematics in space particular on
game theory
to create a new field evolutionary game
can you can you explain game theory so
when i was diving into your world when i
was reading the book when you talk about
miracles and i don't want to do this out
of order but you talk about like every
theory has sort of a base assumption
it's like we can't
we can't explain that one so just please
accept that this is the the miracle as
you call it and then from here the rest
of my argument is going to make sense
right because i don't understand the
math well enough the math every time you
mention this and nobody pushes you on it
i don't understand the math well enough
it feels like the miracle to me but it
isn't to you so what actually
what is the math if we can sort of say
it at a at a lay person's level what is
the math how does it show that there's a
zero probability that we're describing
reality as it actually exists right so
so the intuition behind using game
theory for evolution is very much like
if you play a video game right if you're
playing a video game you have to focus
on getting points as fast as you can if
you get enough in a short enough time
you get to the next level otherwise you
die
and an evolution is very much like that
there's points they're called fitness
payoffs and you have to gather them as
quickly as you can and if you
get enough
roughly in a short enough period of time
you don't go to the next level but your
genes in your children go to the next
level and so it's that's roughly why we
want to think about game theoretic kinds
of things but it's of course there's
more detail than what game theory is
literally that what survives the next
round yeah so game theory is
literally
a mathematical theory of strategies
in games
and how different strategies may
be better or worse in certain
circumstances so
for example if if you
one game that our species plays is a
social cooperation game and when we were
hunter-gatherers
if we all went out
and cooperated i went out and hunted
wildebeests and you went out and hunted
wildebeest and others gathered berries
and so forth we all worked hard and came
back at the end of the day if i didn't
get enough and you got more then you
might share with me and tomorrow i might
share with you so that's cooperation but
and so that works very very well that's
that's a strategy that works very well
how would we define this game so i was
tempted to say okay so it's about the
people who have the strategy to win this
game called life but i'm not sure that's
actually how you define it would would
it be the game called procreation right
okay so in evolution
fitness is all all about procreation in
fact basically that's how it's defined
it's almost
um it almost sounds like it's a
tautology that fitness being more fit
means that you're having more offspring
so whatever you do that lets you have
more offspring is by definition
giving you greater fitness and so so in
the case of cooperation i mean that's
not the only strategy by which a species
could
be successful at having offspring in the
next generation but for homo sapiens
that was a strategy that we did use and
in many social species do that ants and
bees and so forth but as soon as you
have that strategy of cooperation then
it turns out there's another strategy
that could be very fit and that's
cheating so i could pretend i'm a loafer
now i don't want to go out there and put
my life on the line in front of a
wildebeest
and so i just go down to the river i
hide out and relax and take it easy and
come back and go oh i worked really hard
today i couldn't find anything can i
share some of yours
well and and so it turns out that that
strategy is very very fit in the sense
that i didn't put my life on the line if
you're willing to share with me i'm
gonna survive so i'm gonna have so that
strategy will actually proliferate you
all have kids i'll have more loafers and
so but it turns out if you have too many
loafers too many cheaters then no one's
bringing home the bacon
and the whole thing collapses and so you
get the idea that the the
the fitness of a strategy depends on the
other strategies that are around if
everybody else is cooperating then being
a cheater is very very effective it's a
it's a fit strategy if everybody's a
cheater then it's not fit to be a
cheater because everybody's going to die
and so that's what we call frequency
dependent selection that the frequency
of a different of a strategy
will affect its fitness and so that
makes it more complicated and that's why
we have to do mathematics it's you can
actually with mathematical precision
predict exactly what
proportion of the population will be
cheaters and what proportion will be
co-operators once you know certain
things about strategies and and their
payoffs and so it's that's why we use
evolutionary game three it allows us to
go away from just intuitive
notions of evolution and selection and
so forth to
precise definitions of strategies of
their fitness how they interact when
when three or four or four five or n
strategies interact what happens it gets
very very complicated
then our intuitions just give up but the
math can still carry on where our
intuitions give up okay so you partner
with a mathematician and did you have a
theory that you wanted to see if he
could
write the the sort of algorithm for or
how did that work how did we end up
focusing on math
right so
in about 2008 i decided i really wanted
to go after this because i had a
suspicion that evolution would not
favor
creatures that see reality as it is i
figured that
it would
be too complicated and take too much
time
and it turns out that was correct but
but it was more interesting so i got a
couple of my graduate students working
on this i worked with them we learned
evolutionary game theory and we started
they wrote simulations and so we just
simulated
creatures with different strategies and
we let them see
all of the reality or none of the
reality would let them just see fitness
payments give me some of the data points
so one of them is going to be fitness
payoffs right when you're writing in
math um uh like are you making this from
a human perspective are you taking this
from an aunt's perspective i've got to
imagine the math looks differently
depending on the species strategy that's
already evolved sort of over
evolutionary time
so oh god i can only imagine how
complicated this is but give me a give
me a couple of the variables so that
this stops being one of the miracles for
me and i can really start to understand
sure so one kind of game that we had
them play was a foraging game so you
could think of big a big checkerboard or
a big chess board and you had them play
what do you mean them the so so my
graduate students then had these
simulated creatures and we just plopped
them down
at random in this big huge checkerboard
okay and we had also planted resources
around on the checkerboard and did you
have to give them incentives
well in in some cases we would just
we would either allow them to evolve
incentives so that was what we call the
genetic algorithm so we started off and
they were all stupid they they all um
had random genes for how they moved and
how they would try to feed and how they
would perceive but there had to be some
sense of score right so if we're using
game theory there has to be some sense
of
you have an objective that objective is
to gobble the resources or whatever yeah
so certain resources that were just
randomly distributed on the checkerboard
gave you high fitness payoffs some gave
you low fitness payoffs and and so forth
so we just play so it's just defined as
fitness payoff without anything beyond
that exactly they had they had a
driver if you will to put it in human
terms they had a drive to acquire
fitness payoffs right right got it um at
least in when we when we programmed them
now when we just had the genetic
algorithm there was no drive at all the
they they just what would make them move
so they they had to do something but the
genes were random so they would do
stupid stuff like they would stay in one
spot and try to eat and and they would
get nothing and they'd just keep trying
to eat there the whole time until then
and they would just die out right so in
the first generation right
we
did they have the desire to eat and
procreate like were they looking to mate
or how did you
all the only the only desire was we we
told them they had to do something every
step of the game
that's all we did and there's a list of
items for them to choose from eat move
yeah yeah that's right eat and move and
that was pretty much it and step yeah
eat and move and then you had something
on the back end that said if they scored
this many number of points then they
essentially procreate and they move on
to the next generation if they don't
they're dead exactly okay got it so the
first generation pretty much all of them
just acted very stupidly they didn't get
any fitness points or very very few some
bumped against walls and just kept
bumping into the walls and so we would
just breed the ones that were a little
bit less stupid than the rest and then
make a new generation of them and we did
that for four or five hundred
generations and then by the time we'd
done that 500 generations we had
creatures that looked very purposeful
they were foraging in an almost optimal
pad pattern they weren't wasting any
time when they were getting high fitness
payoffs and we could look at their
perceptions
and we found that they evolved
perceptions that didn't show them the
truth
it showed them only fitness payoffs
which was
no surprise to me but but what was a
surprise was the reason why it wasn't
just that it was too expensive to to see
the truth it was that
seeing the truth
and seeing what you need to survive are
very very different things
and and so so i went to mathematicians
one once i had the simulations
and i realized that this looked like it
was a real result and then i got some
new ideas about what was really going on
so the simulations really taught me it
wasn't just that it was too time and and
resource expensive to see the truth it
was that in some sense the truth is
completely irrelevant
that that it's and and also that the
fitness payoffs themselves don't tell
you anything about the truth they're
they're just independent so i went and
and worked with a mathematician named
chaitan prakash
and um
we've worked together he's the
mathematician i'm i'm not and we have
and i've gotten some other collaborators
as well some very very good
collaborators and we have a couple
papers that we've now written where with
two different angles on on the theorem
and the bottom line is is this
um it's it's straightforward to prove
that
well straightforward we have a
mathematician working with you um this
but to prove that
the
an organism that sees reality as it is
in whole or in part
is never more fit
than an organism of equal complexity
that sees
none of reality
whose senses actually don't have the
right language to see reality
and is just instead tuned to the fitness
payoffs okay so
this is sort of the first thing that i
trip over so
um i get where i could see that it is
more advantageous to be optimized for
fitness payoffs than it is for reality
and this might be a good time to give
people your sort of vr explanation so
that we right we can bring this into
something they can visualize but first
let me finish what i'm bumping on so
i get how if you're optimized for
fitness payoffs that makes more sense
and being optimized for reality reality
could have too much just complexity the
processing power that it would take to
understand is crazy which is exactly why
i think your
desktop analogy is probably the better
one to hit right now sure um
but what i don't understand is why it is
necessarily true that you need to hide
reality like why that would be part of
it that seems right sort of a bridge too
far for my my simplistic mind so that is
a bit technical but but the top-level
idea is um that fitness payoffs
depend on the state of the world right
so to be concrete and the organism and
the organism right they depend on the
world and the organism and the state of
the organism and the action
so i mean one example is you know if if
i have a t-bone steak
and you know the fitness payoff of that
t-bones take for a hungry lion is pretty
high
but for the same line that wants to mate
it's very very low and for you know a
cow in any state and for any action the
t-bone steak offers no fitness payoffs
and and another example is if i'm 000
meters under water that's pretty bad for
me but for a benthic fish that's it's
perfect for a benthic fish right so so
evolution by natural selection has this
idea that there is an objective reality
and fitness payoffs do depend on that
reality but the payoff for the same
state of reality could be very very
different for a benthic fish
than for me for a benthic fish 5000
meters underwater is the same state of
reality as it would be for me but the
payoff is very very different for the
benthic fish okay so it would kill me
this this may not be the thing to dive
into but i'm going to push on this a
little bit and see if we get somewhere
fruitful um
what where i sort of come to in your
theory is that
they're
lurking under this
is a reality right the moon is there to
describe something it's my shorthand
it's not it is not a meaningless
shorthand it is a shorthand to help me
get my um my fitness payoffs fair but it
it represents something right okay so if
that is true
understanding that i am five thousand
feet underwater still seems relevant
even though it's not it doesn't have a
fitness payoff so obscuring that or
obfuscating that for me so that i can't
understand that i'm 5000 feet underwater
is not helpful okay i can tell that if
we chase that we won't get where we want
to go but if you give us the desktop
analogy right right because this i think
will will give us the anchor that we
need to keep exploring right
so so
if evolution didn't shape us to see the
truth what did it shape us to see and
the i think the the good analogy is that
it gave us like a desktop interface
so if you're
writing an email
and the icon for the email you're
writing is blue and rectangular in the
middle of your screen
does that mean the email in your
computer is blue rectangular middle of
the screen the middle of the computer of
course not that i mean anybody who
thought that misunderstands the point of
the interface is there not to show you
the truth which in this metaphor would
be the circuits and software the diodes
and resistors magnetic fields you don't
want to deal with that if you if you had
to deal with magnetic fields to write an
email good luck you would never no one
would hear from you and so that's what
evolution did for us it gave us a
desktop interface that's there to hide
the truth right the desktop interface on
your computer is there explicitly to
hide the circuits and software you don't
want to see that stuff that would seeing
the truth would get in the way but isn't
evolution somewhat of a blind watchmaker
i'd like to just steal absolutely from
my man mr dawkins so if it is blind it's
not hiding anything right so it's just
it's optimizing you for something so
that's where i get into the
like
the the punch line of your theory not to
get too far ahead but for people to
understand why i'm stopping you so the
the punch line of the theory is we are
so the far like
so far off from what is real as to like
not even be able to
to conceive of what our world really is
and we will definitely get into space
time is doomed it's one of the most
fascinating things to come out of
your theory but it's like
i it doesn't feel like a blind
watchmaker is going to hide something
from me it just it it has no sense of it
it's just here is the shortest path
across the checkerboard to get to this
thing it's not trying to trick me into
thinking that there is no checkerboard
it's just like eh take this path go that
way it's the shortest path i'm
essentially lazy right if you think
about
um caloric realities right so the way
that i look at a a human
i want to write a book called the
physics of being human
and to do that i would really it's the
like you write the book that you need so
to understand in myself why i am both
driven and lazy is so [__] weird so i
both have these huge ambitions and i
want to do this crazy [__] but i also
want to sit on the couch and eat chips
right so it's like and they're both real
man i am not like when people think that
like i'm being humble or whatever no no
i really have like a hardcore drive to
sit around and do nothing but i have
this like sort of weird balancing thing
so for me to understand it from a
caloric utilization standpoint right as
humans we have these massive brains that
are calorically just ravenous and so for
me not to have to forage all the time i
take a strategy where i'm conserving
calories again blind watchmaker not not
somebody going hey you know it'd be
really smart it just realized the ones
that didn't conserve calories [__]
died and
you know they didn't survive a famine or
whatever and the ones that sort of
balance this like i'm going to go down
and i'm going to face the wildebeest and
i'm not going to hide all the time you
know i'm going to put myself at risk and
and all that stuff the ones that found
that balance they were the ones that
procreate and they pass on their genes
okay so part of the physics of being
human is to both be
adventurous and lazy at the same time
where where i'm trying to like figure
all this out then is okay i have this
layer i have my interface but it doesn't
feel like it's
that like
radically far from
the the truth so i'll give you my
example so all right it's mapping this
room you're gonna tell me [__] dude you
don't even understand like space time
isn't real none of this [__] is real i
look away the moon doesn't even exist
right right that seems
like it would be more problematic for me
to navigate the world if all of that
were true
so what i want to understand is how much
of of what you say about the computer
interface is really that divorced from
reality right oh man stick with me i'm
going to see if i can actually
articulate this
so the the computer analogy
is super profound it's easy for me to
understand i don't want to have to deal
with the electrical fields and
all the other things the diodes or
whatever all that stuff
but when i think about
whacking into a rock
that seems like a way closer thing to my
reality i've mapped something over that
same with the moon i've mapped something
over it it isn't actually that thing
right but it feels like
it would be mapping over
some
gravitational object that rotates around
the earth
but i think you're going to say that's
not true
right so
one analogy because it
our intuitions
rebel at the idea we're not seeing the
truth because what we're doing here
works so well right and open to that
we're not seeing the truth where where i
get lost is how [__] divorced can it
really be and still be useful right well
so there's two aspects to that one one
is just that you know the mathematics of
evolution is quite clear
meaning the probability that you see the
truth is zero is zero that's right and
and that we have a paper that we just
submitted on monday um where we we show
that the
fitness payoffs erase
all evidence of world structure almost
surely what the [__] does that mean
when you say world structure what do you
mean so the world
presumably there is some world some
reality yes like atoms
uh well you don't need to postulate
exactly what that i need to know what
you mean by the word the word structure
so it could be and what we show is it
doesn't matter what the structure is
pretty much the result holds so it could
be for example a structure like uh a
distance relationship a metric will be
called a metric or a topology or a
measurable structure okay or a total
order like one is
uh smaller than two is smaller than
three that's a total order right
so whatever the so what you can show is
that no matter what structure you might
think the world has you can prove that
the
fitness payoff functions that govern our
evolution so you're right there's no of
course goal right it's not a
goal-directed kind of thing right you
know evolution's not trying to do
anything but the point is that the
fitness payoffs which govern evolution
the probability that they will actually
preserve the structure in the world so
that by being tuned to the fitness
you're tuned to the structure in the
world yeah that probability is precisely
zero that's what we prove so the only
thing that we know is what you think is
real is the only thing we know is not
real
is that accurate well i would say
according to theory of evolution now we
can step back and ask ourselves what the
theory of you know what we think about
the revolution right
well before we get to that because you
you do you you have a pretty deft
challenge to how because my first
literally the first note i took about
you was my whole problem is you're
laying out hey evolution mathematically
proves that essentially evolution isn't
true so i was like
like if everything i think evolution is
true
how can it also be true that everything
i know and think is false right which is
essentially what i just heard you say so
mathematically i can prove this the
quote unquote structure of everything i
think is absolutely not true
and yet i'm using evolution to
base that math on right so walk people
through how that is in a contradiction
right so it's
what we show is that the fitness payoff
functions
erase any information about the
structure of the world so that the
structure of our perceptions
is just unrelated to the structure in
the objective world
but the argument that i just gave does
not apply to our math and logic
so just perception just perceptions so
you have to be very very we have to look
at all of our cognitive capacities is
this whole thing an umvelt problem
well it what it's saying is that uh your
umvelt is like your user interface that
every creature
you know homo sapiens has one who one
user interface we have the apple
interface and someone else you know some
other creatures have the mac or the pc
interface or whatever yep and and and
there's going to be a wide variety of
interfaces that evolution evolves every
species has its own class of interfaces
um
and
in each case the interface never shows
any
species the truth at all according to
evolution
but there are selection the selection
pressures that erase information about
the structure of the world in perception
do not also apply to
math and logic
the reason is that we do have to have
some elementary ability to reason about
fitness payoffs two bytes of an apple
give me roughly twice the fitness
payoffs of one so
not reasoning about objective reality
just reasoning about fitness payoffs and
the logic of fitness payoffs right so
that's why there's no selection
pressures necessarily to be geniuses of
math and logic but at least the
selection pressures are not uniformly
against any capacity in math and logic
whereas in the case of
perception
it's one can show the unit the pressures
are uniformly against any
access to the structure of the world
in in terms of the structure of what we
perceive in in our senses so that's why
we have to be very very careful so
certain for example christian
philosophers alvin plantinga for example
has argued from
not mathematically but informally from
evolution saying that it would make all
of our cognitive capacities unreliable
and therefore evolution by itself was
unreliable theory and therefore we
should not you know
not believe it and i'm not saying
anything like that at all i'm saying
that the theory of evolution
has a core that john maynard smith found
the evolutionary game theory when we
look at that core
we find that there are certain
peripheral assumptions like dna exists
whether or not it's perceived space and
time exist those peripheral assumptions
turn out to contradict the mathematical
core of the theory and you know one can
prove that
but math and logic our ability with math
and logic does not contradict the
evolutionary you know the core of
evolutionary theory so this we have to
be very very careful that's why when you
do this you know it's not just hand wave
anymore you really have to look at the
replicator equation you really have to
look at the fitness payoff functions and
do combinatorial analyses and so forth
this is very very careful work but
that's what we do with our best
scientific theories we take them very
very seriously we look at their
equations and say okay if the equation
entails
the probability zero that we see reality
as it is then
we've got a choice
we can agree that we don't see reality
as it is or we can say we need to revise
the theory now we don't have an
alternative to evolution by natural
selection
so if someone wants to propose one
they've got a lot of work to do because
evolution of natural selection is an
incredibly
successful theory so it's space time
though and you're you're ready to ditch
that one sure so um okay so i'm i'm
getting i think what you're saying about
our umvelt and uh because we haven't
defined that i'll define that so
umvelt is your senses taken the world in
a certain way and uh we have different
senses in a bat so a bat can do
echolocation we cannot and therefore the
way that a bat interprets the world is
very different than the way that we
interpret the world and every sort of
species has a different umvelt you can
even have humans that have a slightly
different envelope one that's colorblind
there's a million other examples but you
you get these variations that are
massive between species um you get like
a dog the
the amount that they can smell is crazy
they can smell a seizure coming which is
absolutely bananas whereas of course
you're not going to get a human that
does that because of the number of um
scent receptors in the nasal canal and
so cool all right that that's an umville
so i get perception i get that this is a
problem of perception
i think i understand the math part i
prom because i'm going to i am making a
layman's assumption that math is a
universal language i've heard that
repeated a million times i am so bad at
math i don't even understand that
but i accept it out of ignorance uh
the logic part let me define logic based
on what i think you're saying
and you tell me if i'm getting it
correct so logic the way that i
understand it from the way that you just
use it because i would have said it's
human reasoning so i would have gotten
tripped up um on like natural selection
or
oh god the one you just used it as an
example and you said that that we think
space time a great example right we have
in my layman's
view we have logiced our way to space
time but that's failed me so
um
tying it back to fitness payoffs i think
is is your definition of logic that we
have to be able to reason that one bite
of an apple is not as good as two bytes
of an apple is it really that basic
that it is entirely tied to fitness
payoffs that's well from an up from the
evolutionary arguments that i'm giving
right so the arguments that but do you
think that logic reaches deeper than
that when you say that it's untouched by
this um
false
interpretation oh god i'm putting words
in your mouth well right so okay so that
gets to the bigger picture of what i'm
up to here right so
and this is how science progresses what
we do
um is we take our current best theories
and we try to push them to their limits
and find out where they break where they
fall apart and when we do that
that's when we break out the champagne
because the whole point in science is to
push our best theories to the limit to
find out where they break down
and then
get some clue about a deeper theoretical
framework
and the constraint on that deeper
theoretical framework is it better
agree with our current theory where our
current theory is right
but only if you're saying that that
theory is logic this is another one of
those times where i bumped against what
you're saying so and and this may be
that simple is that what you mean that
like where we are using true logic right
as you define it tied to fitness payoffs
i think
um then it must agree because you've
said if you work backwards i'm not
trying to get rid of evolution i'm not
trying to get rid of the things that we
know like we can launch a satellite into
space and geotarget you but that
requires relativity so whatever we um
get to whatever answer we come to
better be backwards compatible with the
ideas that essentially work
can you give me a definition of work and
is it tied to logic as you define it and
thusly fitness payoffs
right so so the idea would be that
scientists are doing reasoning
right science is about reasoning is
reasoning a synonym for logic to you
pretty much right that's right
and if we um
we can't
logic is in some sense non-negotiable in
the sense that
if i let go of reason and logic then
there's nothing left
right
is that true
because all we can do is if we if we're
having a conversation
we can talk informally but
we can't make very good progress unless
we are absolutely precise in what we say
but let me tell you how that struck me
so does somebody who's schizophrenic do
they have reason and logic
well
in the sense that if we're trying to
understand our situation in the universe
humans will make stories yes
if the stories are internally
self-contradicting
you can be pretty sure you're going to
be in trouble right so any internal
contradictions are going to destroy your
theory
so the first thing you have to do is
make sure that what you're saying
doesn't contradict what you're saying if
you because that just means you're
saying nonsense
so one one reason we we use math and
logic is to make sure that what we're
saying isn't just flat out nonsense
but once we're past that
criterion and much of what we've said is
nonsense but once we get past that
criterion then it turns out we may have
been using our terms very imprecisely we
might use the word space we might use
the word time and we think we know what
we're talking about but when you
actually push you find out oh no i would
say this in this situation that in that
situation oh and they contradict i've
contradicted myself again so once again
we find that if we're we just use
intuitive concepts we get trapped in
self-contradiction namely nonsense so
the whole point of being mathematically
precise
one point
is to make sure that we're not doing
nonsense the second is to take our ideas
and force us
to put our ideas very very precisely so
we know exactly what we're saying
i get the math part though the part that
i'm really trying to wrap my head around
and maybe we should just move the [__]
off this but i'll take one more swing
um
math i get
if if math truly is a universal language
that just sort of gets at the substrate
of what this whatever this is it
actually gets to that cool i can see how
um the fact that we that uh
chasing fitness payoffs manipulates our
umvelt i get that it doesn't touch math
cool
now what i'm trying to understand is you
said specifically math and logic now if
you just said math we'd be done and we'd
move on right you say math and logic so
then i immediately go to schizophrenics
think they're being logical right what
on earth makes us think that we are not
just the way that our our um reality is
essentially this total abstraction right
in your own theory and and i would agree
man i i routinely think in myself and
and express other people your brain is
creating a virtual reality now i never
ever ever conceived of it as sort of
radically different as you but um i get
that we're in sort of this this huge
abstraction but what makes us think that
that our the way that we reason the way
that we logic outside of math
the way that we reason and logic outside
of math isn't
the same as a schizophrenic where it is
it is so delusional is it just the
internal consistency or and couldn't
that itself be a delusion that our fear
of internal um contradiction is
problematic is is actually a delusion in
and of itself oh very very good so i see
your question now so yes there are deep
issues here in terms of of logic and
there's something called girdles in
completeness theorem that basically
gives it to me
no not at all so so girdle is probably
arguably one of the most profound
results ever in human thought
girdle proved
it's called girdlexing completeness
theorem and he proved that
any axiomatic
logical or mathematical system that's
rich enough to do arithmetic
there will be
statements that are true but can't be
proven within that system
unprovable truths the notion of
truth
goes deeper than the notion of proof in
that system you must say well okay i'll
take that truth and put it into my
axioms then he said well but then
there'll be new truths that you can't
prove and this goes on forever what he
showed was that the exploration of
mathematical structure is in principle
endless
it's unbounded and in fact if we get get
to it later on
in my theory of consciousness i'll argue
that that's what consciousness is up to
this unbounded exploration of all the
possibilities of consciousness that
comes from girdle's theorem but you're
you're absolutely right we can choose
give you girdle serum one more time
right right as simply as you can
the simple bottom line is
there is no end
to the
exploration of mathematical structure
it's turtles all the way down all the
way and in principle you can never know
it all
okay interesting and i definitely get
how this ties into your theory of
consciousness so let's spend a minute on
turtles all the way down
uh super cool story
it i i don't remember where this started
so if you do by all means jump in but it
uh woman was claiming that the earth is
flat and so somebody said okay if it's
flat then what is it sitting on and the
story goes that it's sitting on a giant
turtle and so the person asked her what
is the turtle sitting on and she said
don't be ridiculous it's turtles all the
way down
and of course you get into this
eventually one of those turtles is on
something so
and that's that same human
like
visceral reaction is how i react to your
theory of consciousness so why don't you
give it to us and then we're going to
start playing around with the brain okay
but what is your theory of consciousness
right so
i'm saying that space and time aren't
fundamental
because evolution by natural selection
entails that not only not fundamental
but not real right that's right they're
they're only real as
forms of our experience
they're boom belt that's right they're
our own built they're not
they're part of the virtual reality
desktop extra abstractions that's right
okay but they're not real in the sense
of an objective reality in the sense
that they would be there even if no
creature were around to perceive it so
it's again like a virtual reality every
time like if you're playing a game of uh
you know fast race cars in in virtual
reality i see a red corvette sorry i'm
so sorry to interrupt but uh
would another way to say that
be
because you say when i look at the moon
and then i look away that i you haven't
said this in this interview but i've
heard you say it many times you trash
bin it or something like that you're no
longer rendering it garbage collector
garbage collected right um would another
way to say that the moon doesn't exist
quote unquote if there were no species
to perceive it it's really that their
the moon wouldn't be
um
created essentially it's like it it
it is requiring an umvelt of a
particular species to create that
shorthand over evolution to say whatever
that thing is that the moon is meant to
represent
um
it has been created by humans as a moon
maybe bats see it entirely differently
and fish don't have any sense that it's
real at all who knows
it's really that we
we
evolution maybe is a better way to say
it that evolution has created this
virtual reality and therefore if that
species cease to exist its version of
virtual reality would obviously cease to
exist because it's being created exactly
oh but i'm going to say it's being
created by the brain you're going to say
the brain is not real uh is that true
right the brain okay yeah this is where
this [__] gets so complicated okay so
i'm going to shut up now uh back to your
theory of consciousness right so bob
just point your vr thing is is i think
a good example for anybody who's
spent time in vr what i'm saying
will be obvious right if you're playing
a vr game of like race cars you see a
red corvette when you turn your heads up
that way you know that you're only
seeing a corvette that you're creating
when you turn your head that way you
turn your head to the other side now
you're seeing a blue mustang the red
corvette is gone it doesn't exist
there's no red corvette in the computer
that's running the game the red corvette
is only in your mind when you look over
there now you're seeing a blue mustang
because you're making that and so you
you're rendering these things and then
destroying them there is a reality but
it's not corvettes and it's not mustangs
it's the supercomputer that's running
the game and that's what i'm all i'm
saying is evolution gave us this headset
and it's no surprise i see the moon i
render a moon i turn away i don't render
a moon so the moon doesn't exist there
is something but it's just not like um
it's not the moon it's nothing like the
moon just like there's something there's
a
supercomputer in the the vr analogy but
in the supercomputer if you look you'll
never find any you know green mustangs
or red corvettes you give an example in
your book that is so powerful if you
would take a second you describe what's
happening in your eye when you look at a
scene that includes a red apple and the
way you describe it at the photoreceptor
level i was like oh my god it gave me
such an understanding of how
terrifyingly complicated all right
things actually do you remember the part
that i'm talking about
right so
this is now just normal physiology and
so for the moment i'll be talking as
though you know i believe in brain
science
and and we have to do that right
right right so you have to bracket
everything is within the framework of a
theory so i'm now using neurophysiology
and physics right now for this to
describe this
so
when you look at a red apple and suppose
there really is a red apple just for
sake of this argument it's got a real
shape and
light rays hit it and they have certain
frequencies and they pass through the
lens of your eye which focuses it on the
back of your eye just like a camera
would and on the back of your eye you've
got
a piece of brain called the retina it's
nervous tissue so a piece of nervous
tissue it has 120 million photoreceptors
it's like a 120 mega megapixel camera
and each photoreceptor
is just
reporting how many quanta of light how
many photons it catches so i caught
three i got 10 i caught 50. that's all
you got a bunch of numbers so you have
120 million numbers
there are no colors there are no shapes
there are no motions there's just 120
million
colors
numbers not not even colors it's like if
you look at the
the digital output from a video camera
you'll just see a stream of numbers if
you look at stream of numbers you'll see
the problem that vision has
you can't tell from the stream of
numbers what's going on you have to
create
three-dimensional objects and shapes and
colors and so forth from all those
numbers and so that's the problem that
we have envisioned you have all these
photon counts 120 million photon counts
on each eye
and from that you have to then create
objects see that it's a boy on a bicycle
eating a hot dog you know
all of that is you and that comes
that's not just theory it becomes really
an important problem when you're trying
to build computer vision systems right
you're trying to build a self-driving
car say with with passive vision systems
well so the vision systems are cameras
the video cameras say they're taking in
video maybe they have you know a few
million pixels that they come in that
each each you know maybe 70 times a
second or something like that
well those pixels are just numbers
you've got
millions and millions of numbers coming
in every second
there's nothing in there that says
that's a boy that's a car don't you know
that's a stop sign there's nothing in
there that says that you have to you
have to have megabytes of software
that's really intelligent that takes all
those numbers and starts computing with
them to figure out three-dimensional
shapes to figure out what the objects
are to and to figure out oh i'm about to
hit a boy i need to hit the brakes and
so forth so so this is not just abstract
self-driving cars have to solve the
problem of starting with numbers that
are in
unintelligent in some so just a bunch of
numbers and giving you an intelligent
assay of what's happening in the world
and so that's why a third of the brain
literally a third of the cerebral cortex
the higher part of our brain is involved
just in visual perception when you add
the other senses it's it's more like
half the brain is involved in sensory
perception
because the senses are doing an
incredibly complicated job but from my
point of view what they're doing is
they're building
a vr world
and it takes a lot of processing power
you need super computers you know what
would have been considered super
computers to do vr in real time and
that's what we're doing we open our eyes
and it looks like we're just seeing a 3d
world with objects and shapes and colors
it seems so
real and so just we're seeing the truth
but because
you have billions of neurons trillions
of synapses that are doing it all within
about 100 milliseconds and so you're so
fast at it that you just think you're
opening your eyes and seeing the truth
you're seeing a vr world that you're
projecting out there in real time
of course now i'm going to rescind the
brain part right so the brain itself is
part of the space-time interface so the
brain itself is just our vr symbol for
something deeper that's doing the real
work and so the question will be what
deeper theory can we come up with right
so it's going to be a theory outside of
space and and time but this gets back to
what we have to do in science all the
time we push our current theories to the
limits until they break
and then we have to actually take a
creative leap
we can't necessarily just use the
language of our theories that we just
broke
we have to come up with a deeper
language and that is
a leap
when einstein
went past newton
he took a deep leap
and when quantum mechanics went past
einstein and newton it took an even
deeper leap and the language was
entirely different but you can show for
example that if you start with einstein
you get back newton
as the speed of light goes to infinity
the way newton talks about space and
time and matter
in
mass
those terms actually mean something
different than what they mean in
einstein in newton mass is mass
and you have the same mass period
in einstein your mass depends on your
velocity
your length depends on your velocity
distances depend on your velocity none
of that
space and time and mass don't behave
that way at all in newton we use the
same words but they mean something very
radically different in einstein and in
quantum mechanics it's even a deeper
leap but with quantum mechanics you get
back
newton as something called planck's
constant goes to zero again roughly i
mean this is short first approximation
so what we so the leap i need to make
here now is
evolution by natural selection is
telling us
that the language of space and time and
then objects in space and time
is the wrong language
to describe objective reality
so the leap i need to make is to say is
there a deeper theoretical framework
that i can come up with
such that when i look at the dynamics of
that deeper framework
and project it back into our vr
interface which i'm which is space and
time so i've got this vr headset of
space and time that's what evolution has
told us this thing is just a headset
you've got to guess
right i'm not telling you what's outside
the headset i just told you
all i can tell you it's a headset
now it's up to you
to take a stab at what's behind the
headset so that's what i'm up to
so i'm probably wrong right i mean
we weren't evolved
the evolution by itself doesn't say
anything that makes me think i'm evolved
to see the truth
but it at least is telling me that
whatever the truth is out there you're
only seeing a headset it's good enough
to tell us that but it's not good enough
to tell us what's outside
that takes a leap outside of the theory
of evolution but the constraint on that
theory is
we need to show
how our deeper theory could lead to me
having a headset and in that headset it
looks like things are
evolving according to evolution of
natural selection in other words my
deeper theory has a strong constraint on
it it better look like
einstein's theory of space-time it
better look like quantum field theory
and it better look like evolution by
natural selection the three big pillars
of modern science if i can't do that
then i know i'm wrong so even though all
of those things exist in the headset
that's right okay this is [__]
fascinating uh so
now tall order do you have
that idea
i have a proposal let's hear it i'm
probably wrong
can before you give us your proposal i
have i want to acknowledge you dude the
way that you talk like that i love so
much i can't remember if it was plank or
board that said um anybody this is a
terrible paraphrase anybody that thinks
that science advances because objective
truth is presented is absolutely wrong
science advances because the old guard
dies and the new people grow up just
believing it to be self-evident i
[__] hate that so much the fact that
people are not willing to be wrong
drives me crazy makes me want to choke
half the world out right so the fact
that you talk from the perspective of
hey look i've got a theory it's probably
wrong
like oh dude i love that so much i wish
more people were were as hardcore as you
to present you oh god you call it bold
and precise
i i present in a theory hypothesis
that's both bold and precise right right
love that and that you're willing to be
wrong so anyway i just had to take a sec
every time i hear you say that i want to
stand up and clap because so few people
are willing to own that they're probably
wrong but they're not afraid to make a
bold and precise prediction so right now
and the the thing about that is
i just want to understand
and so if i'm stuck on my ideas and
won't let go of them
then if i'm wrong i'm going to not
understand so it's really stupid to
think that you're you have to have
enough hope that your ideas have some
promise that you pursue them but not be
dogmatic about them that's a it's a fine
balance very much so all right so now
our bold and precise claim is
so i'm proposing
i'll say what i'm proposing and then
i'll say why i went that direction so
i'm proposing that reality
is a vast social network
of interacting conscious agents so that
consciousness is fundamental and think
of it like the twitterverse right
there's
tens of millions of twitter users
billions of tweets
lots of stuff trending
it's a
twitter users are tweeting and following
and so it's all a big social interaction
right so i'm proposing and this is a
mathematically precise proposal that
there are things called conscious agents
so conscious experiences like the taste
of chocolate the smell of garlic are
fundamental
and
limited choices based on those
experiences that's part of the whole
structure so experiences that inform
choices that's going to be the
fundamental idea in a vast social
network
and
the idea then about our headset is is
this follows
if you are a twitter user and you want
to understand
deeply what's going on in the
twitterverse well you can't engage with
all 10 million users and the billion
tweets it's just overwhelming you would
die before you could even read all this
stuff
so what do you do well whenever we have
big social media data
we have to have visualization tools
those tools will necessarily ignore most
of the data and the part that they don't
ignore they're going to compress it down
they're going to digest it and compress
it into some eye candy that we can
understand
some objects in three dimensions that
have nice colors and move in certain
ways and using that visualization tool i
can maybe see what's trending in new
york what's happening in all you know so
the big scale of europe what's happening
in little scale and irvine and so forth
so i'll have a tool that lets me zoom in
and out and and it'll be ignoring most
of the stuff and that's what i'm
claiming space time
is in physical objects it's our headset
it's a visualization tool
that certain conscious agents use
to
interact with this vast social network
that would otherwise be completely
overwhelming and so we've made the
rookie mistake the finish that we're
gonna say rookie mistake of taking our
headset for the final reality okay we
have a tool and we thought it was the
thing we were visualizing
amazing very clear now let's back up and
break these down part by part because
conscious agent i'm familiar enough with
your work that i kind of know what you
mean but i don't think people understand
that like how small you take that down
because you're not talking that they're
oh hey this is all a bunch of people
which is probably what somebody hearing
this for the first time thinks that you
think they're invisible people that make
up this social network
um
how far like so turtles all the way down
boys and girls so we're talking about
consciousness all the way ah right how
like are um neutrinos like are they
conscious
right so no
so this is very different from is that
because it's in the
headset that's right neutrinos are
particles inside space time okay sorry
damn it nothing inside facetime is i
fell for rookie mistake uh okay so out
outside
uh so
do you delineate between uh
advanced cognition and consciousness not
in principle no interesting
so do
you
i'm really trying to get you to use
other words so define agent right so
we're conscious we're this is a
collection of conscious agents having a
social
ex did you say social media specifically
no you do that social network social
network they're like a vast social
network got it okay so uh give me what a
conscious agent is
the simplest example the most trivial
agent that the mathematic allows is an
agent that has only maybe two
experiences maybe like red and green
okay that's all it experiences why does
it have to be two
well it could be even just none you
could have an agent that has none or one
but i tend to think about what i call a
one bit agent a sort of fundamental but
i could have an agent that has only one
experience like nothing or red
has an experience makes me feel like i'm
not i'm not interpreting what you say in
the same way that you mean it so you you
said something and it went by so fast
okay uh which was
the taste of garlic and chocolate are
fundamental if i uh experiences that's
right okay so
literally the taste of garlic is a
conscious
agent no it's an experience okay so
that thing it's not like hey bob you're
the taste of garlic no no no okay
so sorry to use overly crass language
but that sort of that was my initial
interpretation of what you said okay so
that makes sense so
uh i will then push and say if that's
the case is this not wood not garlic and
um chocolate be tied to the umvelt of
the
species
absolutely so certain agents will does
that mean it's in the headset then um
well those experiences so the headset is
created out of your experiences
so what an agent does is uses some of
its experiences
as a format for a headset but okay so
what i'm trying to get to and i think
this is what you're proposing is hey we
take the headset off and we see
like what do we see and i get that we
have the problem of perception and
that's ah the that's all back to the
umville and stuff so
c is a stand-in for obviously i don't
know how we would be interpreting this
world in the movie the matrix it is
green code right so when he explodes the
agents they explode into code so code is
their
fundamental element um
what is
your fundamental element consciousness i
get that right but now i'm trying to
understand like how if it's
consciousness all the way down
what is consciousness like is it a
physical substrate or
is it not and we have to let go of the
very notion of physicality yeah we're
i'm letting go of physicality in the
sense i'm completely letting go of space
and time and particles electrons protons
and neutrons those are only headset
entities but is it fair to say that you
have no idea then exactly what
consciousness is you just
well so so
what we do so here's this gets at the
fundamental way we build scientific
theories and this is what we talked
about a little bit earlier which is
about every theory has miracles right so
every scientific theory
has certain assumptions that it makes
that we just have to grant you we just
have to grant no there's no theory of
everything we hear about a theory of
everything there is none so your miracle
is consciousness that's right okay so
there so i'm saying that there are
entities that i'll call conscious agents
these agents themselves are not
conscious experiences why do they have
to be networked
well it
it turns out that
when agents interact
they form new agents so and i didn't
know this when i wrote down the math i
was just writing down what what could i
possibly mean by consciousness being
fundamental
i wrote down the minimal structure i
could think of that could have
some
set of experiences so there's some set
of experiences that this creature this
entity could have and a small set of
actions that it could take and that was
all i wanted to write down but then when
i had them interact with other agents
right because the actions are to affect
the experiences of other agents it
turned out the interactions satisfy the
definition of a conscious agent so when
agents interact they form new agents let
me ask a question that i think is going
to explode this apart and help us all
understand what you mean
do i exist
um
yes
in what way
so you your conscious experiences exist
so all i can see is your skin hair and
eyes yep i see but that's just my
interface symbol
if you look at yourself in the mirror
all you see in the mirror is skin hair
and eyes but you know firsthand that
what you don't see in the mirror your
hopes your dreams your aspirations your
headache all the rich world of your
conscious experiences that
is not visible in the headset so my
conscious experience is both in the
headset and outside of the headset
that's right that's right so it exists
outside of space and time that's right
in fact this is where the [__] starts
getting real weird it's pretty
interesting because all i can see of you
are the experiences in my own headset
and so my headset is made up of my own
experiences that i've put in a
particular format of space and time and
so so it's just a format like in a vr
for example you have a certain format in
which the vr is presented
that 3d vr format has nothing to do with
the shape of the super computer it's
just the format of
of that and so this
what i see of tom right here is just
what my headset allows me but i believe
and you know firsthand that what i can't
see in my headset is this rich world of
your conscious experiences
when i look at my cat
my headset only shows me fur and
something really cute and i believe that
behind that cute little icon in my my
interface my headset there is a real
consciousness but i have less insight
into the consciousness than i have into
a human with a mouse even less with an
ant even less and then when i get to
things that i call rocks and you know
protons and neutrons i have no insight
at all
no surprise the whole point of a headset
is to simplify things
does this conscious entity need to eat
very interesting
because that gets to what
see this is now outside of space and
time it's not evolution it's not food
and so forth so the question is what are
these agents up to what are they doing
what's the why are they having any kind
of actions at all
and
the answer is i don't know yet i've got
a mathematical definition of conscious
agent we're starting to play with
dynamical systems of them
and as to the question of why they would
have any dynamic why would consciousness
do something as opposed to nothing what
what kind of answer could be deep enough
or at least what what kind of proposal
could be deep enough and i've only had
one idea
ever
that i've heard that seems deep enough
to at least be on the table and that's
consciousness all the way down
well no no i'm saying if we assume it's
consciousness all the way down yeah what
are all those consciousnesses up to what
is the social network doing and why okay
so the idea is the social network
what's the one idea so so the one idea
is the girdle is in completeness theorem
right so if consciousness is all there
is conscious agents are all there is yep
then mathematical structure is only
about consciousness and conscious agents
because that's all there is
and that means girdle telling us
that there's endless exploration of
mathematical structure means
there's endless exploration of the
possible kinds and varieties of
consciousness
and conscious agents and what
consciousness is up to is is what i call
the kid in the candy store theory
girdle tells us there's an infinite
candy store of exploration of possible
conscious structures and the candy is
all the variations of conscious
experience consciousness and conscious
experiences that's right and that's i'm
not saying it's right but at least it's
deep enough all right that it could be
you know it's on the table
okay so here's the good news i i am the
guy that's
uh
dumb enough
to like need everything explained and
hopefully that will be useful to the
audience uh okay so
i've got this infinite candy store of
consciousness
the thing i cannot get past is there's
some
there is utility
in creating the headset otherwise why
the [__] would it exist so if there is
utility in the creation of the headset
first of all i get it probably begs
questions that you you don't know and
it's beyond the the scope and you've
already asked me to just accept that the
miracle is consciousness and you're not
going to tell me anything beyond that
because nobody has a theory of
everything respect get that right uh but
i want to poke in the spirit of fun
partly and then just to see like where
the sort of edge cases are sure all
right so we don't know if conscious
entities need to eat and the reason that
i asked that question was because all of
this starts with you looking at fitness
and so if there is fitness into taking
multiple bites of the apple therefore
logic is going to be born out of that so
that i know to keep eating the apple um
but then it begs a question of
well what am i underneath the visor
underneath the headset just right keep
our nomenclature consistent what am i
beneath the headset and why does it
matter that i have a representation
that
that is based in the idea of fitness of
eating an apple right so
that's where i'm like
what what is that a representation of
why does this representation need to
exist like have you i'm sure you've
daydreamed about this even if okay let's
hear it those are the fun questions
right that's that's what we're really
interested in is ask answering those
questions
and
so we're going at it in two different
directions one is you know
sitting back in our armchairs and trying
to think like girdles incompleteness
theorem and so forth and saying could
this be can i repeat what girdle's
incompleteness theorem is it's the one
part of this i'm nodding and smiling but
i'm like the [__] is he talking about
uh so
it goes something like this and you will
tell me where i'm wrong so
uh
in fact god can i even articulate what i
think i'm i'm gonna fumble through this
okay i i don't even i feel like i
understand a middle piece of it i don't
know where it begins or where it ends
but that
we have some sort of mathematical
equation that says you're never going to
find the limit to which you can
uh explore one thing
but i don't get why that thing is
gurdle's incompleteness theorem has
nothing to do specifically with
consciousness right no no no somebody
leveraging that to explain
why is it then that consciousness is
the only thing that you've seen put on
the table that
uh ties into that oh well so
okay the reason i went after
consciousness was i've been trying to
solve what's called the hard problem of
consciousness how is consciousness
related to brain activity yes and so
people have been trying to show how
consciousness
can be booted up from brain activity and
we've utterly failed to do that or how
the illusion of consciousness could be
booted up from brain activity and there
are no mathematic absolutely no
mathematically precise theories
after decades of effort that could
explain even
one specific conscious experience or one
specific illusion of conscious
experience like the taste of vanilla or
why we why this kind of brain activity
must be the illusion of the taste of
vanilla why it could not be the illusion
of the taste of chocolate there's
nothing on the table
i mean there's no science that can
predict even one specific conscious
experience or one specific illusion of
conscious experience
and
so the reason i went after consciousness
being fundamental the reason i went
after that that's different from girdles
incompleteness there was that
i didn't want to be a dualist right so
when as scientists we try to create a
theory based on as few assumptions as
possible and we only want one kind of
assumption we don't want to have like i
want this physical stuff and i want this
consciousness stuff you you have to
choose
pick either physical stuff that's
unconscious or pick consciousness stuff
that's not physical but don't don't do
both if you do both that's dualism and
and this knot is not as clean maybe
we'll have to but we don't want to go
there so
so maybe dualism will end up being where
we have to go
but i'm not going to start there i'm
going to start with
physicalism doesn't seem to be working
out it seems to be principled and
physicalism is that you can stack enough
neurons together that they suddenly
become conscious that's right space and
time are fundamental and that's where
this what evolution is basically saying
physicalism is false
that's why i went after evolution
natural selection says the language of
space and time
is not the language of objective reality
that means physicalism as we currently
conceive of it is false
we can't boot up consciousness from
neural activity because neural activity
is just
a data structure in your headset neurons
do not exist when they're not perceived
they couldn't possibly create
consciousness they're not even there
consciousness i'm proposing creates
neurons when we look inside skulls but
neurons could not possibly create
consciousness and i was forced to that
by looking at natural selection
so i'm proposing that if i believe that
i really do have headaches
and i really do taste chocolate and i
really do have conscious experience and
again i could be wrong about that it
could be an illusion and just to be
clear in fact we never finished this
because i am still i'm just paralyzed by
girdles and completeness theorem but
we're going to move on from that to not
brow beat the poor audience
um
so going back to uh this network of
conscious agents you're saying and this
gets into the part about the brain i
want to talk about so split brain
patients can have an experience of being
literally two separate people so you go
in you cut the corpus callosum so
everybody to your point for a minute i'm
going to assume that the brain actually
exists sure sure uh so you go in you cut
the corpus callosum which allows for
communication between the two
hemispheres of the brain and suddenly
you realize that two personalities will
emerge within the same head um
do they they don't both have internal
dialogue do they
they have different likes and dislikes
but do they have uh internal because one
side handles language so they both do
they both have language perfect so the
right hemisphere is very adept at
language
fascinating so they both have language
one could be an atheist the other devout
which is so crazy and that's a real
example right from the literature
my friend vs roma condren um has a video
on the show
you can google that and say you know
split brain patient roma condren this
patient has you know
atheist and a believer in one you know i
think in this case the right hemisphere
didn't believe in the left hemisphere
was a believer that's crazy i've never
seen the video but that's oh it's great
one case the right hemisphere wanted to
be a race car driver the left hemisphere
wants to be a draftsman
they have just completely different
personalities they can play 20 questions
with each other you can give a word to
the right hemisphere the left hemisphere
will will sometimes fail in 20 questions
they can't figure out what's in the
right hemisphere's head whoa so there so
there are separate contents of
consciousness so separate that you can
lose at the game of 20 questions with
your other hemisphere
that's insane right so
your that would be a very sort of
simplistic example of two different
conscious agents that have come together
that's right that's and that's the idea
so you are one conscious agent
well the way that i perceive myself is
as one conscious agent but secretly i
just a whole bunch of conscious agents
well that's that's the thing you are
it's both are true so you are one
conscious agent but you're also two and
you're also probably a huge lattice of
interacting conscious agents you know
the microbiome yeah
a little bit yeah okay so in your gut
you have like trillions of bacteria it's
crazy you have more foreign cells in
your body than you have your own cells
uh would they be conscious agents
nothing in space-time strictly speaking
is a conscious agency do they not
represent something that's another thing
okay i'm sure resisted asking you this
question because i think i know how you
will answer it
the very like no one knew the microbiome
existed right so if this is all
in my headset how is something so
detailed that once somebody looks it's
like oh my god it's proliferating right
there's all this stuff how can we
discover something new
if it's literally just made up like the
first time that somebody cracked open a
skull why did everyone look at it and
see the same brain the first time we
looked into the microbiome why do we all
see the same thing shouldn't a novel
thing that evolution did not prepare us
to see and understand like how do we all
see the same thing now i think i
actually know how you're going to answer
it right because once you have a good
visualization tool it depends where you
take it so i can take my visualization
tool for the twitter verse right and i
can zoom in on irvine to look very very
close and i can zoom back and look at
the whole united states and see what
that looks like so a good visualization
tool for a social network lets you zoom
in and out but doesn't that assume that
everything oh god let's see if i can
articulate this doesn't that assume that
tweets are a substrate that is universal
so
that uh the
the the first image that came to mind
was
why the hell the first time somebody got
their head bashed open did everyone see
brain the same way and i thought okay
well he's gonna say that the reason they
did is because you have a facsimile in
the headset for um
tissue that's made from atoms and so
like that that visual structure it
doesn't care like what it is it's
photoreceptors taking in i see this much
uh light on this receptor this on that
all that so it's like hey i have a
system for dealing with visuals and
therefore when photons bounce off of
this thing it's going to construct
something and i understand things about
3d and mushiness and texture and all
that and so my brain is programmed for
that so no matter what you put in front
of it it's it's going to see that i
assume that is correct
roughly but this is the it's more like
if you are trying to look at the
twitterverse
and you have a you if you design a
really good tool and it lets you zoom
into what's happening just in your block
versus in your city versus in your
county versus in your state versus your
country versus the whole world versus
europe and so forth if the tool is
really good it's going to let you
you will see different kinds of
structures as you move in maybe it's
very very all the same in my block where
you know we all have similar ideas and
we do the same thing or in my my county
but it'll be very different and so so
the reason we see
right when you look inside of a brain
you are not just and you see all these
neurons and so forth you're not just one
agent you're two you're a whole lattice
of conscious agents what we're doing is
using our visualization tool to look at
the whole list of conscious agents that
are together forming you
so we're using that visualization tool
to look and find your finer detail at
agents that perhaps are having smaller
and smaller
sets of conscious conscious experiences
we don't really know that it's a
one-to-one relationship between a cell
or whatever and what else yeah it's
going to be many to one that's right so
for example i mean i see someone i call
tom in front of me but that's i see one
tom but my theory is proposing that that
there are countless conscious agents
that i'm interacting with there's one
highest level conscious agent but
immediately below it there too that i
associate with what i call the left and
right hemisphere and then below each of
those there's countless more and there's
more than one personality in tom the
right and left hemisphere agents
probably have very very different
personalities it seems to be a general
trend
they're very very different and who
knows what goes
among all those agents all the way down
so my visualization tool of course all i
see right now is
skin hair and eyes that it's pretty
simple compared to what i'm claiming
really good looking skin very very good
and it's a really complicated and
intelligent the network of conscious
agents but i see just very very little
but when i look in when someone looks
inside and sees a brain
the 86 billion neurons they're seeing
there is my visualization tool telling
me
there is a lot of conscious agents in a
really complex social network going on
here
that's what i'm seeing is 86 billion
neurons and then when we get down to
chemistry
which is you know explode that's even
more more complicated
now you know saying well my interface is
starting to give up because you're not
seeing much about consciousness with
with neurons you might be getting some
notion of networking and
exchanging information maybe it's a you
know biochemistry you're not seeing that
quite as well when you get down to you
know quarks and gluons you may be giving
up but there's tons and tons of quarks
and gluons and that's my interface
telling me look
i can i'm showing you a lot about tom
i'm not showing you too much about his
two hemispheres you know the two agents
i'm showing you very very little but you
know i'll show it to what you call you
know
86 billion neurons and then
and eventually my interface is going to
have to just give up because i mean the
whole point of the interface is the
network of conscious agents is too
complicated for you to grok you can't
grok it so we i'll give it to you one
agent at a time here's tom
not even tom's left and right hemisphere
just tom
and then all the agents if you wanna you
know you can get out you know if tom
will let you he can we can go in there
and look in his brain and we can tom
will not like yeah i think he will
that's right i wouldn't that's right
so that's why the tool
is showing us more complexity all the
way down
it's
it's a vast social network
and each agent isn't just a stand-alone
we're we're a combination of many many
other agents that's going to be one part
of the theory that's really interesting
is mathematically precisely looking at
all the ways that agents can combine
but agents do combine
uh we'll be going to some new
mathematics i think something called um
infinite categories in topi where
infinite categories what infinite cases
category theory and it's called infinity
categories
and also teleport theory some some whole
poi dopi right the hell is that it's
some
fairly abstract mathematics that allows
you
to
economically start to describe countless
other ways of interaction and so what i
want to i mean i have a few ways that my
current
mathematical model which just uses
things called markovian kernels and
measurable spaces
obviously plotting for what i mean most
mathematicians would say it's fairly
plotting but but it's it's it's it works
and it's it's real math
we can start with that and then go to
these
you know category theories and so forth
to actually get the full richness of all
the kinds of ways that they could could
connect and interact and so i want to go
after that
but the
the one question you asked earlier was
why does it look like we
have to eat and do the conscious agents
themselves have to eat and what are they
up to and how can we know and here's
here's my answer to that
first
i don't know the answer so so here's how
i'm going to go after it first i i am
thinking like girdle is incomplete and
certain we can come back to it that
might be a deep
motivation for the whole dynamics but
suppose i'm that's wrong and i realize
it's wrong and i realize i'm just not
smart enough
and my team is just not smart enough to
figure out what conscious agents are up
to and why they're doing it and so forth
what the here's what we're going to have
to do
we're going to have to propose a
mathematical projection from the dynamic
subconscious agents into space and time
and propose how that dynamics gets
represented in terms of for example
quarks and gluons interacting
right now i'm studying scattering
amplitudes at the large hadron collider
i want to show how i can predict
scattering amplitudes when two gluons
hit four gluons go spraying out from
the dynamics of consciousness
the the reason for doing that is that if
i'm not well in a couple reasons but one
is if i'm not smart enough to figure out
what consciousness is about what i'll
then do is say here's the mapping and
that gives me back space time now now
that i know what's happening in space
time i'm going to pull it backwards and
say what does that tell me about the
dynamics of consciousness and i'll go oh
i never thought about that so so
conscious agents have to be interacting
this way for it to look like this in my
headset so if i'm too stupid to figure
it out and it's very very likely i will
have to take my theory of conscious
agents projected into my headset and say
what would it look like oh i'm getting
the wrong answer okay so i need to
change my dynamics of consciousness this
way so it really looks like the
scattering amplitudes of quarks and
gluons in the large hadron collider and
when i get that match then i go okay
this is at least one dynamics of
consciousness that gives me the right
answer in my headset now what is it
telling me about what consciousness is
up to so if i'm not
if we're not smart enough to do it from
first principles and i want to do it for
first principles but if i can't i'll try
to reverse engineer relativity theory
evolution by natural selection
quantum mechanics
reverse engineer all of those pull them
back to the realm of conscious agents
look what they're saying about the
social dynamics and then try to get a
clue about what that's about and answer
questions like am i forced to think that
they need to eat or is there some deeper
principle is is it for example that i
can only
send an experience to another agent if
an agent sends an experience to me
is there is there that kind of dynamics
that and is it going to be like
um the small world networks we see for
example in the internet
where you get
big hubs
like google and apple which get lots of
hits
and then tiny little guys like kaufman
who gets almost no hits and then a few
in between but but but you get this and
and there's in some sense the number of
social connections you have
is some sense your notion of fitness
the creators of google are billionaires
hoffman's not a billionaire there's a
correlation between the number of hits
that google had gets the number of hits
often gets and the difference in
richness now is that a deep
property of these conscious agent
networks or not see these are the and
this is what was fun about science i
don't know the answer
evolution of natural selection has told
me it's not in space and time
it's saying
it's not this is all a headset you're
going to have to think as a scientist
out of the headset but i can't tell you
what's outside the headset so we have to
be very imaginative
and we have to choose what we're going
to go after because of course we're
probably going to be wrong so you need
to choose what you think is going to be
interesting
i'm going after consciousness because
i'm trying to solve this hard problem of
how is consciousness related to our
brain activity
and
the mathematics is forcing me to see
this vast social network if i bring it
to consciousness there's this whole
network but i don't know what's about
all the science we've ever done all the
science that's ever been done so far
has only been in our headset
quantum field theory assumes space time
the fields are defined over space time
relativity is space time
and evolution financial selection has
been about what evolves in space time
all of our science which is very very
good science has been
in our headset we've never really
stepped out of our headset but science
has the tools there is some initial work
there's a guy named nima arkani ahmed at
princeton uh institute for best city
princeton who i think is taking some
really important steps
beyond the headset because he's already
realized space time is doomed and so he
is already being very adventurous
and stepping outside of space-time
looking for mathematical structures in
which space and time and quantum
mechanics do not appear
all right i'm and there's
something i find super interesting and
this whole concept of space time is
doomed right
if we abandon space-time
it begs a question about causality so
right now i cannot believe this is true
but this is true on monday i have two
memorials to go to young people crazy
i'm literally heartbroken and the fact
that they
both have memorials on the same day is
too weird to even contemplate
so that got me thinking about the very
nature of death but if time doesn't
exist
is there like so
causality requires time it requires you
to be moving through time for something
to happen first that then creates
another knock-on effect another knock-on
effect so on and so forth but if time
doesn't exist and i mean admittedly we
don't know what it's being replaced with
but theoretically we know that it isn't
going to be like we perceive it now so
if time doesn't exist
then
like
where is that notion of
entering the the time stream of breaking
out of seeing this is a linear equation
and obviously tying it to death being
i would love to think that there's some
way to once again interact with these
people if i can just take the headset
off right um do you have any intuitions
or is there any math around like if it
if it isn't
let me just ask one question is cause
and effect real outside of the headset
i think inside
inside headset no so we have a useful
fiction inside the headset you don't
think there's cause and effect
right well we have the appearance of
cause and effect right so if i hit the
the cue ball
and hits the eight ball into the corner
pocket it looks like the cue ball caused
the eight ball to create into the corner
pocket yes and that all works but it's a
fiction of causality in the old video
game of pong you have these little
paddles in this ball and you hit and it
looks like the paddle is causing the
ball and and the fiction of causality is
good enough that you can play a game you
can actually figure out how to put maybe
a little spin on it and so forth or in
you know more more advanced games like
you know virtual reality or
games or you know like grand theft auto
you have a nice fiction of causality i
turn the wheel to the left my car goes
to the left turn the wheel to the right
but it's all a fiction the wheel has no
causal powers
the gas pedal has no causal powers but
it's a useful fiction evolution gave us
a useful effect i don't know that that's
true so think about
okay a system was created let's let's
take the analogy of grand theft auto so
a
system is created such that it awaits
input from your
your control pad whatever that control
pad may be
now admittedly my control pad i press it
an electrical signal is sent to
something that turns on or off or opens
or closes or whatever and then a whole
cascade of things happens but it it is i
mean you could even trace back the
causality to i ate something that gave
me the ability to create atp which gave
me the ability to generate electricity
which gave me the ability to fire a
muscle which gave me the ability to
press a button which triggered this
electrical chain reaction that caused
something to happen on the screen but it
it there is a chain of causality in the
headset there is a chain of causality in
the headset like even even though it is
the perception is that you know i'm uh
turning and the act of actually just
moving that thing it makes it turn so i
get that that isn't happening but it
does create this chain reaction that can
be in the headset
understood right and so there i disagree
so if you look for example in a vr
version of it where you see your virtual
hands holding a virtual steering wheel
yep
there's no feedback from the screen to
the computer uh there's no feedback from
the screen to the computer but there is
feedback right like if you think about
vr so but so there is a there is a real
cause and effect but it's not what we
see in the headset
on the headset it looks like the wheel
that i'm seeing in the headset in the vr
headset is what's causing the car yes
but i am typically in vr i would be
mapping my real hands either by holding
a controller or by having cameras well
absolutely so i'm mapping my hands my
hands do a movement and this program is
programmed to wait for the input from
the movement of my hands to then trigger
that sequence that i just listed before
so there is a cause and effect yep but
but notice it's
not from the things that you're
literally seeing in the headset i agree
with that but i'm telling you but there
there still is a chain of cause and
effect absolutely because when you say
that it is an illusion of the eight ball
hitting the things like
that well true within the construct of
the headset i'm saying right right well
so
maybe another example might help on this
so when you like drag your icon you've
written a email and it's the icon is
blue in the middle of your screen you
drag it to the trash can yep
you are using say a mouse or a touch pad
and and in so in this analogy that would
be like the real cause and effect but if
you said
but it's really the motion of the icon
on the screen to the trash can that's
causing the file to be deleted that's
just an illusion of causality right
there's no feedback from the pixels of
the screen into the computer and that's
what i mean everything inside space and
time is like seeing the icons on your
desktop things move around on your
desktop but it's due to something like
your
you know joystick or something else but
the headset
since the headset is all of space and
time
what that means is that i'm saying that
everything inside spacetime is part of
that fictional console i now get what
you're saying so in the in the headset
that perception is illusion and i was
dragging a sort of back and forth
between but it's good i mean that's so
very very good now take me outside does
cause and effect exist if time doesn't
exist so two answers and i'll get to the
death question
um
i think
in the realm of conscious agents there
is a notion of cause and effect but it
boils down to a notion of free will that
seems to be
one of the key notions of cause
in
in this
in quantum mechanics by the way i should
point out that
they
when you do quantum computations
normally in normal computations there's
a causal order if you do this multiply
and then an add
that order is important if you do the
add and then the multiply you get a
different answer right the order the
causal order but it turns out in quantum
mechanics you can
do a you can get rid of causal order
when you do your computation you can
have a superposition of
you know multiply followed by add with
add followed by multiply both orders so
you have a superposition of the causal
order and it's a theorem that in general
you'll be faster you'll be more
efficient if you let go of causality and
space-time
and it turns out that it's actually been
done and when you build these things and
let go of causality and space-time you
tap you tap into greater efficiency
so
when you let go of space-time you're
also letting go when what space-time is
doomed means also that
everything that we believed to be
causality in space-time was just a very
useful fiction in our headset just like
the fictions in various vr games that we
play
it's a useful fiction lets us play the
game um there is an underlying causal
order and we're
arbitrarily ignorant about what that
causal order is now about death
i don't know but here's behind here's an
interesting idea
suppose you go to a vr arcade with some
friends to play virtual volleyball
and you put on your headset and body
suit and you're on a you know a
like a beach volleyball scene palm trees
and sand and then that and you're
playing
vr volleyball for a while then one of
your friends you know says i'm
thirsty i need a drink he takes off his
headset and bodysuit to go to go get a
drink his avatar
sits lifeless on the sand it collapses
on the sand it looks within the vr
headset within the game as though he's
dead
but he's his consciousness is not ceased
he's merely stepped out of that
interface all right now we're in what
i'll call the phineas gage problem okay
so once so phineas gage for those that
don't know is railroad worker one of the
most famous examples in neuroscience
he's hitting a tamping rod it's like a
three foot rod thicker than your thumb
and it shoots up through his jaw and out
the top of his head taking if i remember
right a teacup's worth of brain matter
which seems impossible but never loses
consciousness but they say he's forever
different right different
and he used to be like super sweet and
he was one of the best workers and then
he becomes this belligerent [__] and
he can't hold a job right so
i will say that's that is the
so using this notion of the
headset or the umvelt it's like once you
alter the way that his brain works and
i'm fully willing to accept that this is
a problem only inside of the headset but
once you alter that function within the
headset he's fundamentally different now
if the headset is
is what i'll call the umvelt it's our
interpretation
of the stimuli
once he goes takes the headset off the
inter now we're into transistors diodes
electrical gravity or oh god i may have
tripped this up with gravity but
everything's shy of that one um now you
have he
the experience of that person would be
fundamentally different i would be
fundamentally different because i'm no
longer
experiencing things through the lens of
my brain essentially right so
while
i it would seem to me that there's no
way around the fact that in the game
homie is dead and so
or lifeless to use your example so
since that's the only thing that i want
to relate to that person through my
headset right that's what i'm used to
that's where the emotion lies and then
now once i step outside even emotion
would be called the question almost
certainly in fact definitively in your
explanation the way that i process
emotions it would just be unrecognizable
outside because i no longer have the
brain i no longer have all of those
things interesting you said quite
possibly right so there is a possibility
to you that outside the headset it's
close
to what we experience inside right see
so for me
um it's going to be a matter of
following the math on this
so
the theory of conscious agents itself
doesn't require an agent to have a self
so meaning it can shatter into a bunch
of little pieces well that
that a self is something that a network
of conscious agents has to construct
so it will be the borg
it would be
like an interface representation okay so
my what i call myself
is on this kind of view
no less a construction than space and
time
and so it's not clear to me how much of
that construction will survive
death
will meaning taking off the headset oh
which are two
possibly very different things well it
looks for for people who still had the
headset on it would be interesting it
looks to them like death but for the
person who's actually having the headset
taken off
maybe it looks like what some people
describe with psychedelic experiences or
near-death experiences and and and so
forth or or you know really extreme five
dmt meodmt experiences and so forth
these are things i want to explore so at
this point i i'll have to say you know
not only you know
i'm likely to be wrong i'm still trying
to figure out what the ideas are that i
would want to put on the table that are
wrong so but the
the theory of consciousness i have right
now doesn't require conscious agents to
have a self to have memories
to have
the ability to learn or anything like
that so networks of conscious agents
construct selves they construct memories
they construct
emote you know patterns of logics of
emotions and so forth it's going to be
very interesting to to ask the question
about how much when you know me my
parents die recently right so you know
it's very very it's very very difficult
right you
and
so we all would like to think that there
is
some way to have contact with the person
anyway if you're a physicalist of course
that's out of the question right
if your consciousness is nothing
above and beyond brain activity
then when brain activity ceases there's
no consciousness end of story that's
very very clear
in the theory of conscious agents it's
quite possible that that yourself
dissolves
but the conscious agents
it seems to me will still be conscious
agents
they've just
maybe dissolved this particular
data structure that they created the
space-time data structure with a
particular personality and memories and
so forth so basically you're saying
if i can just put different words around
that to make sure that i understand
the
the conscious ages coming together to
form a person are a data structure that
well they form the person as a data
structure so everything that i believe
about me
is very different than what i believe
when i was five
and and i didn't believe anything when i
was maybe one
and so i've
over the years and decades of my life
i've put together this story of i'm
myself
this is sort of an idea that some of my
physicalist colleagues have said like
dan dennett a self is a story that we
weave it's a narrative that we give
maybe there's something to that whereas
where i wouldn't go with dan on you know
and he's a wonderful guy he's he's
brilliant but you know we
are it's okay to disagree right he would
say that you know
there's nothing but the brain activity
and the narratives that it creates and
i'm saying well i like the idea of the
narratives but but the consciousness is
the fundamental reality i have to let go
of physicalism because of evolution of
natural selection
and so maybe consciousnesses
won't keep the narratives maybe they
will i have some of my colleagues who
are working with me who think um you
know
that we will keep the narratives that we
will keep that sense of self but my
colleague who thinks that doesn't have
any mathematics to support it and so for
for me on the one hand of course i'm
really open to all the different ideas
but as a scientist if i can't put it
precisely in math
i don't know what i'm talking about yet
i mean you
and that's what you find is
unless you can make it absolutely
precise most of the time we think we
know we're talking about and when we
make it precise we realize oh okay no i
was maybe in the neighborhood but i
didn't really know what i was talking
about that's what mathematics really
comes back
and teaches you and that's the thing
about a really good scientific theory
once you write it down you become a
student of your theory like so einstein
when he wrote down
the equation of general relativity
he had the big idea
falling in an elevator
you would feel weightless
big big idea
if it was free-falling elevator and he
took him eight years to take that idea
and what he called the equivalence
principle and turned it into the
equation of general relativity he wrote
it down took him eight years hard hard
work to take your intuition and go oh no
my intuition what is what do i really
mean by that took him eight years and he
was einstein
right right
for the rest of us i mean if einstein's
ideas aren't that quite precise and take
him eight years to get it so precise
that he knows exactly what he meant
that's what that's what i'm talking
about so he writes down the equation a
year later
a guy named schwartzild who's in the
front lines in world war one
is solving einstein's equations on the
front lines and he he solves equations
and he discovers black holes
and he writes back to einstein and says
your theory says there are black holes
einstein didn't know that he didn't
believe it he spent decades
disbelieving it his equations were right
einstein was wrong
the equations become smarter than the
genius who wrote them down and that's
another reason why we do these
mathematical models of science
we take our intuitions it might take us
a decade
to take our intuitions and actually
figure out what we really were thinking
and get them so precise that we say oh
that's
the only
logically consistent way of stating what
i thought i was trying to think
and once you've put it down there
then all of a sudden you become a
student that thing that you've written
down
is going to teach you and that's what i
have with this theory of conscious
agents when i wrote it down i had no
idea about a number of things i didn't
know that agents could combine
it was a friend of mine who pointed that
out to me so agents can combine and also
that that
a weird thing that it predicts is that
our free choices
are not part of our conscious
experiences you can't directly
experience your own free choices you can
experience that you chose but you can
never actually experience yourself
choosing
why
well it's really quite interesting you
can experience like if i go you know
here's there's chocolate and vanilla
i'm going to choose between chocolate
and vanilla
well i just chose chocolate but how did
i do that well i had some deliberation
process but when i finally it i can all
i can do is see myself reaching for the
chocolate or the vanilla i can see my
cogitation processes but but the but
isn't that all in the headset
all that i'm seeing is in the headset
that's right so i'm seeing so by the way
i only know my actions
through my headset i actually don't know
what i'm doing when i reach out and grab
something
i don't know what i'm doing in objective
reality in the realm of conscious agents
how does all of this play out in your
real life and i've heard you talk about
that there are moments where you have
i'm sort of putting words in your mouth
but almost a meditative experience where
you transcend the notion of self
um
how so
how
do you stay so enthusiastic about this
for so long when it seems like
i mean really really at a deep [__]
level man as a human experience this
just all feels so real
right right
well
i wouldn't say that i transcend
the self
but i what i
do get it once in a while is a glimpse
that oh
this is just a headset i actually feel
it
that i'm just rendering this
most of us feel like space just exists
i'm stuck inside space there's this big
stage i'm on the stage
it's very different
i think by the way the next generation
will probably get this much easier
those who have just been raised
spending a lot of time in vrs that are
as compelling and as immersive as
everyday life it's going to be just sort
of obvious you take your headset off and
go it's a no-brainer to think well this
is just a headset too and to just sort
of be there so i think that it'll it'll
be
for the next generation the fact that
i'm having a hard time about it
thinking about it this way and imagining
it experientially will just be sort of
an artifact of the technology i grew up
with if i grew up with vrs that were
really good as opposed to the stuff that
we grew up with which is not that good
then it would just be sort of obvious
you do when you're young enough it's
just this obvious that yeah i'm just
seeing a vr headset too because
by the way here's one way to think about
it
if you close your eyes
you just see sort of gray right
model gray in front of you so it looks
it doesn't look like nothing it looks
like model gray but what is it like
backwards back through your head
when you close your eyes well it's not
modeled gray it's nothing
and it's really the first time you
really if you close your eyes and
experience that yeah what is it like in
front of me yeah it's just gray it's
sort of a model gray what is it like
behind me
absolutely nothing that's the headset
you only have a headset of space-time in
front there is no headset behind now you
have not a visual headset now you have
this
set yeah i can put my hands back there
and do stuff so and so i have this but
it's all a creation it's all and so i do
get glimpses of that
once in a while
but
there were no now put on the natural
selection language right so i have to
pick the language of the science that i
want to use you know because i don't
have a better language in some sense for
discussing this evolution um
there were no selection pressures for us
to see the truth
and so there were no selection pressures
for us to not
take space time as the truth
and so we do piaget tells us you know
that when
we begin to take objects as real as
whether we you know these aren't just
like little data structures that you
create that they really exist all the
time he called it object permanence and
piaget said that you know when a kid is
about 17 months 16 or 17 months of age
they don't have object permanence
permanence you take a little baby doll
put in front of a child they play with
it you put put it behind the pillow if
they're 16 months old they just doesn't
need it it doesn't exist
piaget said and then but at 18 months
now they go and crawl around and try to
get the object the baby doll out of the
behind the pillow
later experiments showed maybe down to
three or four months but the point is
these experiments show that we're
programmed
now i'm using the evolution language
we're programmed by natural selection to
buy into the illusion that objects exist
even when they're not perceived
object permanence when we're three or
four months old
we're not rational it's being done to us
without our permission and so by the
time we come to the age of reason
it's it's the water that we we don't
know that we're wet it's the water we've
been swimming in all of our life we just
have been programmed to take this as the
reality
i took it for the reality it was only
because i couldn't solve certain
problems like the problem of
consciousness and it was only because
when i looked at evolution it began to
tell me space-time is not the reality
cannot be it's the wrong language it
must be only like a headset that i was
going holy i mean i still remember the
first time
i realized
this must be just a headset i had to sit
down it was such i mean i was a grown
adult i was like i was 30 years old or
something like that the first time i
realized this it was such a shock i had
to sit down
everything that i believed all of a
sudden
disappeared but of course the next
moment i was again visually believing
i'm in
reality i'm seeing the truth so the
programming is there but ever since that
that moment when the it was the math
that that did it to me so do you think
created math
very interesting question
my own
thinking in terms of this idea that
consciousness is fundamental and
conscious agents are fundamental
when we actually study consciousness
and there's been a scientific study of
consciousness since
1860 it's called the field of
psychophysics there was a guy named
gustav fechner who started the whole
field
and a lot of my research has been in
psychophysics where we literally get
mathematical models of conscious
experiences and we test people very very
carefully in the lab
we find that mathematical experience
that conscious experiences are
mathematically structured
my experience of this water bottle
the mathematics is unbelievable there
are you can write down differential
geometry you reflectance functions i
mean the mathematics is incredible
it's true of all of our conscious
experience of everywhere we look
conscious experience we it seems so
squishy goes through your fingers how
can you there's mathematics so the way i
think about math and experience is that
mathematics is like the bones of the
living conscious experience they're not
they can't be divorced from each other
there's more to experience than just
math
but there's not less
than math there's math and more and so
that mathematics in conscious
experiences have a deep intimate
relationship that i'm still trying to
understand
but but but the empirical
evidence is quite strong i mean all the
psychophysics that people have done we
just find mathematical structure
everywhere and that's why i came back to
this girdles in completeness theorem
where
where that theorem is just saying
no matter how
many mathematical structures you
discover
you haven't started
there will be endless moisture come from
girdle
figured out how to do this so it came
from and can i let me maybe now i'm
understanding it so
we once thought the atom was the
smallest structure and then we
discovered there's something below that
and something below that and something
below that
are you saying outside of the headset
there's just no end to the something
below that
that's right
interesting that's right that and and
this is what girdle's result is that
there is
no end
to the mathematical structure so it is
the incompleteness theorem that you will
never be able to complete it you'll
never be able to get to sort of bay oh
god i'm going to put words in your mouth
base reality i don't know another way to
say that that's right that's right that
that's what that girdle's theorem seems
to be telling us is that and no matter
how complicated the mathematics is that
you know
effectively you haven't even begun yet
and when you say theorem i assume that
means that this is a math equation that
girdle performed and not it's not
girdle's theory it's girdle's theorem
it's a theorem in other words
it's true
that we can't ever know all mathematical
truths
interesting i don't understand math well
enough to even know what to ask beyond
that so to me were my my ignorance makes
this a miracle i'm willing to accept it
just to um not be abusive i'll just give
you a clue about the kind of thing that
he does
right in the math in the math
there are these things called
self-referential statements that cause
problems okay so if i say um
this statement
is
false now was that statement true or
false well let's let's look if the state
the statement is the statement is false
well if it's
false then it's true true right but but
what then if it's true then it's false
that's right yeah so you get these when
you have self-reference
you get these problems that
pop up
you know the so the
the barber of seville
cuts all and only the hair of those who
don't cut their own hair
who cuts the hair of the barber of
seville right all these kinds of things
so girdle was able to take this kind of
thing and and
make
mathematical statements self-referential
and he was able to create a sentence
that said that
a statement in mathematics that says
this sentence is true within the system
but can't be proved
so he was able to construct that
that's that then that's why so he
actually has the theorem so he proves
and and then he shows that no matter so
if even if you had that sentence in
there'll be a new sentence that's
self-referential
that
and so what he shows by by this this
kind of structure of course i'm
the the true theorem and the true proof
is is incredible there's girdle numbers
it's you have to be not just a
mathematician you have to be a brilliant
mathematician a logician to even
understand it so so it's it's very very
few people who actually understand but
every time you quote unquote solve it
it's self-referential again that's right
it's the self-reference that's the key
so just so there's not in complete magic
i want to let you know that based on
this notion of a self-referential
statement
but but the bottom line is it shows that
there's an endless
in principle endless
possibility of exploration of
mathematical structure and and since i
just mentioned so just to like almost
give it a silly answer it's the
the mathematical equation is what's
below math and the answer is math
structure all the way down forever
forever forever but if consciousness is
fundamental
that means that
there's endless conscious structure
endless just feel like that's just
something that says we don't [__]
understand like that to me quite frankly
is as sort of
i just have to accept it as turtles all
the way down saying math all the way
down or consciousness all the way down
is the same as saying turtles all the
way down there's literally no difference
in my limited mind
right so this is where
we're gonna have to come with every
scientific theory right every scientific
theory will have some set of miracles
and that's that bothers me as much as it
bothers you yeah i don't like it but i
so when i bump up against that i take a
pretty and i don't maybe this is stupid
enlighten me but here's
here's where i come up so i will
routinely be asked if i believe in god
and the answer is no i don't believe in
god in any of the ways that people mean
when they say god but there is so
obviously something that i don't
understand that it is just self-evident
to me you would use the language and
maybe rightly so that
exists as a headset and so you have an
intuitive sense that there's something
beyond the headset and you have no idea
what it is and therefore you just say
there is something i don't understand
right so um even here's the thing that
used to [__] with me as a little kid
the universe is expanding expanding into
what when you build a house you build it
on land right so the land is there the
land is on the planet so it's like
there's this sense of um to for it to
expand it has to expand into something
therefore something had to exist it was
very easy for me to just go yep there's
something here i don't understand the
fact that um general relativity and
quantum mechanics don't play well
together yep there's something i don't
understand like i am i am very okay with
just going
and there's something i don't understand
it's it's the the part that gets hard
for me is the it's math all the way down
where it's
it's no longer
an acknowledgement of this is something
we just don't understand
and it's saying and now believe that
it's math all the way down and i don't
know that it really matters to be honest
but that that's where i always bump and
go
well yeah there are two big camps on
this one is that
we invent math and the other is we
discover it right so when the new
theorem is
published
did the person
discover it or did they invent it right
that's that's one of the big questions
if if
isn't it self-evident that it has to be
discovered
well
but if it is discovered then girdle
girdles incompleteness theorem says it
is mouth all the way down
right so that's that's
that's that's the thing but if it's
discovered i'm sorry if it's invented
then that points at us and says who who
is this discoverer who is this inventor
that's doing all this
so being so
and it's really important for everybody
to understand that that
every scientific theory as we said
earlier stops explanation stops there's
going to be some place where we say
grant me this please
and if you grant me this then i will
explain everything else like einstein
says grant me space and time if you grab
me space and time i will write down
these mathematics and then it turns out
there's black holes and they're all
interesting stuff we can do gps because
of einstein's theory of special relative
general relativity it gives you all this
but
we are granting space and time now
someone else like there's a guy named
seth lloyd who says okay i'm not going
to grant you space time i'll start with
quantum bits and quantum gates
outside of space and time it's just
abstract quantum
computational stuff
and i can show you how to boot up space
time
general relativity from quantum bits and
quantum gates the curvature of general
to relativistic space time has to do
with the action of the gates and so
forth
so he's no longer assuming space time
he's explaining it but now he's asking
for a different miracle please grant
grant me quantum bits and quantum gates
now you can imagine someone going well
now i'm going to do better than seth
lloyd i'm going to explain i'm going to
do something deeper than quantum bits
and quantum case that's perhaps what
what nimr arkhani hamid is doing at you
know princeton
so maybe he'll get quantum mechanics
emerging from something deeper but he
will then say grant me what he's asking
for is the amplitude and some other
structures like that so if you grant me
this amplitude and i can give you space
time and quantum mechanics and and so
forth so so that's the nature of
explanation and
i don't
i'm still try having to come to terms
with that i would like to have a theory
of everything and i can
only have a theory of everything except
these assumptions for my theory
and those assumptions are my miracles
and so
at the foundation of every scientific
theory there's this moment of humility
explanation stops here
it also stops one other remarkable place
whenever in our theory
we have a probability
that can't be reduced
by greater knowledge right so in a
newtonian world if i flip a coin
in principle
if i knew
in detail
the mass of the coin and this
distribution and exactly how i flipped
it i could tell you heads or tails with
probability one
but
i don't know the initial conditions well
enough and so i have to give you a
probability of a half that's a
subjective probability epistemic
probability but suppose
no matter there's a probability that no
matter how much i know the probability
can't completely go away
then that's no longer epistemic there's
something more interesting going on
this was the debate between bor
and einstein about quantum mechanics
there are probabilities that come up
there
einstein was saying those probabilities
are just our lack of knowledge there's
no god doesn't really play dice there's
no fundamental probability going on
there bohr said no no you don't tell god
what to do these are not epistemic
probabilities
these probabilities cannot be reduced
period they're probabilities for
everyone including god
metaphorical god ah one thing i wanted
to ask you that came to me when i was
reading is
the double slit experiment is one of the
weirdest thing in physics for me that it
really messes with me so
for people not familiar with the double
slit experiment you take a single photon
you shoot it through a slit and if
you're not
measuring it as it happens on the sort
of back wall you would see like a bullet
mark right so you fire a single bullet
it goes through the slit and it hits the
wall
if you
uh sorry that's if you watch it if you
don't measure it then it goes through
like a wave and you get an interference
pattern on the back you can put another
slit and if you're watching it it goes
through one slit if you're not watching
it then it goes through both slits like
a wave uh that always just seems so
weird
but if we well in fact i'll i'll ask
does your hypothesis about consciousness
address the issue of the double-slit
experiment yes so it will
come out i believe that what
those experiments are showing us is that
if we assume that everything is
happening in space and time and that
space time is the fundamental reality
then we're going to be confused
what we're seeing is space time is just
a visualization tool we're using for
things that are happening outside of
space and time and so they're not
constrained
to travel through space and time
absolutely not constrained we're
constrained to see them as though
they're traveling through space and time
and that's why quantum mechanics looks
so weird but why does um observing or
not observing change its state
because
we're creating
reality
as we render it
that's what i was wondering if this is
the look at the moon not look at the
moon exactly right the moon does the in
fact einstein asked one of his
colleagues when they were walking said
do you really believe the moon doesn't
exist or only exist when someone looks
doesn't exist otherwise
he was talking about quantum mechanics
my interpretation of quantum mechanics
is exactly that that that space time
itself
doesn't exist when it's not observed and
therefore the particles inside inside
space time i don't know how you talk
about the double slit experiment doesn't
that swa
it potentially
let me ask is that potentially like a a
proof of your theory
well
unfortunately there are no proofs in
science
there
you
every theory has lots of
hypotheses and auxiliary facts and
assumptions and so forth and if if your
theory doesn't come out quite right
you don't know what went wrong in it and
also
um
even if every experiment that you've
done
is compatible with your theory maybe you
just haven't been smart enough to think
of the experiment that will take it down
so so
so no real serious scientist would say
that any scientific theory has been
proved
does it point in the right direction
though it's like you you bring up a lot
of examples but that's not one
is there a reason is there a hole in
that one already that you see or because
to me that that is some compelling [__]
like hey you want to wonder or you want
to know if the moon exists when you look
at it or if it's garbage bin uh i keep
forgetting your garbage collected
garbage collected right when you look
away boom double slit experiment well so
the double-slit experiment is completely
compatible with what i'm saying the
reason i don't take it as a proof
is because there are some physicalists
who have the multiverse or many worlds
interpretations of many worlds
interpretations so hugh everett um for
example so what these guys will say is
that
to really understand superposition and
all these weird quantum things you have
to realize that whenever you make a
measurement whole new universes spin off
and all possible
states that are allowed by the quantum
state function the wave function
um are in are true in some some universe
and so many
serious physicists believe in in the
many worlds interpretation and related
but distinct thing of the multiverse
which is a slightly a different thing
they think that there are multiverses
and so
what what is
what is true
is that local realism is false
so local realism is the claim
that
objects in space time like say a proton
have definite values of their properties
like position momentum and spin definite
values
um
even when they're not observed
and
there's two parts that's the first part
and that they have influences that
propagate no faster than the speed of
light
we have
very very good evidence to say if if we
know anything we know that local realism
is false
but that leaves open whether it's the
locality that's false things
you could imagine things having prob
influences faster than the speed of
light so a guy named you know david baum
has a theory in which things have
influences faster than the speed of
light
or whether it's realism that's false
that which is what i'm claiming that
realism is false that
a particle doesn't have a position or a
momentum or spin when it's not observed
because
you create it as a headset element when
you observe
so that's so i say that we know that
local realism is false i claim that's
the realism that's false but there are
some who can claim it's the locality
right but this is an example of you
saying you have to have a theory that
can be backwards compatible essentially
that's right right it makes sense i'm
gonna ask you a super random question
cause i'm so curious you have a wedding
ring so i'm assuming you're married so
i'm assuming you love somebody yes um
that's that's such a headset experience
yes how often are you sort of
in sort of hey this really is real and
i'm gonna treat it as such
and like does your wife think this is
all like does she find this decidedly
unromantic
my wife is an artist she's a very
talented art artist her name is geralyn
i call her jerry and she's you know
she's
um
not a scientist
and
she appreciates
my science
and even though she can't really
understand any of the math and i
appreciate her art even though i'm a
monkey looking at mozart
right you know because i'm no artist and
so we have mutual respect for the
talents the complementary talents and we
sort of complement each other and do you
just have to turn that part of your
brain off that's like a lot of time with
her
well with her yes because
she'll she's happy for me to talk with
her about it um up to a point and and
then we need to do something different
right and that's that's healthy for me
but yeah
do you wanna so one thing that i find
interesting is people that believe
that this is all a simulation and that
if we just find the right equation we
could essentially exit the simulation
right and that's always struck me as um
intuitively false that there would be no
way to exit the simulation again this
goes back to what i was saying earlier
about the person who takes our headset
off there would just be so fundamentally
different the way that you would be
processing data there's no sort of core
you i think like i can't conceptualize
it feels to me unless the
i mean god is this what you're saying
in fact let me ask is this what you're
saying that there is this this uh
conscious agent that i in the headset i
in fact no there's a conscious agent
that is me
and the way that i present to you right
now is me with the headset on but the
conscious agent could actually possibly
remain intact when it pulls off the
headset you addressed this a little bit
earlier um but it's it's now becoming
more concrete in my mind right it seems
to me quite possible that conscious
agents will continue to exist even when
they step out of so i could take the
headset off effectively exit the
simulation be like what the [__] is all
this around me but still have
a sense of emotion and attachment and
love and
vision quite possibly in the sense that
that this isn't the only headset so
maybe by taking this headset would
essentially be my brain right so i'd be
i'd be out of this headset and would i
necessarily be
putting on another well the headset is
your brain remember
the headset isn't your brain the brain
is just one of the symbols in your
headset for what i'm using for all the
agents for all the agents that are
combining to form you so i i imagine
that it's possible for an agent
to
go to a different headset
could they go to no headset or would
they be then existing in a realm of pure
math
well and that that i don't know so in
the in the following sense so so it's it
so the part that i think i'm confident
about but again
we'll see
agents could get new headsets and a wide
variety of them so we could really
explore and we could and it could be
very head said we can shorthand to
umville that's right a different way of
perceiving and jana batt had said i can
jump into exactly the dolphin headset
and maybe let go of space and time and
do something different than space and
time
my notion of self may
migrate in the process right while i'm
making some of my emotions maybe not
others who who knows do you think of
taking the headset off as is a an event
horizon
beyond which we just cannot possibly
even guess
the the mathematics that i've got says
that a conscious agent
always can have awareness without
experience
there is the
awareness without experience that's
right the math is very clear about that
so when i write down the set the space
of possible conscious experiences of
consciousness i have to write down
what's called a probability space which
is a set of possible conscious
experiences with i think of awareness as
i exist
no it's not very important no i there's
just awareness without an eye
so this would so and by the way i
make no claim to be
you know expert in any like mystical
spiritual traditions like buddhism or
hinduism and so forth but i've i've been
told that they do have this notion
um and so i'm not speaking as an expert
but i've heard that they have this
notion of awareness without content and
that certain meditators claim to
to to be there and you know i i meditate
a little bit and i might get little
glimpses of of a notion of awareness
without a self without any particular
content that's the closest i can get
conceptually to thinking about
a conscious agent without a headset it's
a field of pure awareness
but it it transcends in any emotion any
notion of self
any specific conscious experience but
you've never done psychedelics because
the number one punchline that people say
is
yo you have no sense of self like you
dissolve into oneness
right yeah i know i i i why don't you i
haven't um i may at some point um you
know where it's legal and so forth so
far well what's stopped me so far
is
well i'll put this way i've been reading
the experiences of people so i'm
benefiting from their experiences i talk
with with people extensively actually
some very very extensively about their
experiences and so i've studied them
um there is a price to pay
i um
but only in the headset but only in the
headset well well and while i'm in the
headset see i really i'm so eager to
pursue these ideas i think i've gotten
i know people say well you if you don't
do it for yourself you can't know what
it's really like to be without a self
well but i can look at the math and the
math actually says yeah i'm seeing that
in my mouth so i've gotten the insight
that i need there did you listen maybe i
will do at some point you know did you
listen to sam harris's podcast about
taking five grams of psilocybin i think
i haven't heard him do this it's very
interesting because i know you know sam
um
you must listen to that podcast okay it
is [__] fascinating and he was
talking about the fact that um and i
haven't done it either by the way uh so
and i have a very clear i am a
physicalist is that what we call right
physical uh so because of that i'm like
i am not [__] with my brain like i'm
super paranoid i do
part of me wants to do it so if you cut
my corpus callosum one hemisphere wants
to do psychedelics really badly right
right the other side is like get the
[__] out of here we're not doing
psychedelics it's a very bad idea
absolutely so i'm i'm sort of stuck in
this like go no-go scenario anyway i
agree that's when i said there's a price
to pay that's exactly what i was that's
that's the i am super paranoid so sam
said in in the experience he had a
moment where he he forgot that he did
drugs like he had no sense of oh i have
taken a drug to be in the state and i'm
simply in the state and i'm going to be
in this state forever and this is what
life is and he was like it it is a type
of hell where it is just it's uh now i'm
putting words in his mouth but the
feeling i got and he may have actually
said this was that it was like a form of
just never-ending terror right and so
you sort of pass through that and he was
like there are other moments where it's
it's never ending bliss and you're like
it's going to be blissful forever
and it was just oh the thought of where
you have no concept i have done
something to myself right i've taken a
drug and this is a consequence of that
and it will ultimately wear off
uh that it's interesting it is
interesting man and i get how that can
really shape people's perception of what
is real and like really shake you loose
because as as i read this stuff and for
anybody that's made it this far first of
all congratulations this [__] is so deep
and so heady but the more time that i've
spent with your ideas the more i
actually i feel like someone is sort of
filing off a callus on the bottom of my
foot and it's like whoa we're getting to
like a different sensation here i never
realized that i had uh a perception in
you know when you've got the calluses
that are like half an inch thick it's
like you just forget that that can
actually feel something so the more time
i've spent with your ideas the more i'm
like man there really is something here
and so
i the first note i took on you was so
arrogant and so aggressive and i was
like dude does this guy not realize that
he invalidates his own theory by saying
like this is about natural selection
because i didn't understand your whole
thing about math and reason right so but
then you like you start spending more
time with you're like [__] i can't just
discredit this
then you start exploring it like i
definitely before i started thinking
about your stuff die hard physical list
i will probably regression to the mean
right so i'm going to slide back to that
unless i really spend time on this
because it is such a compelling illusion
absolutely but it it does
i can feel things pushing me at my back
to experiment with psychedelics for
reasons like this where i yes i could
meditate for the next 40 years and maybe
get to the point where i could have one
of those experiences of what it means
to be aware without a sense of i i
literally can't imagine what that is
right now i can imagine blanking out
right i can't imagine having a sense
that there is awareness without
me being inserted somehow into that
that's right um so it would be really
fascinating to very quickly be
ejected out of you know my normal state
of consciousness and into this and part
of part of what i promised myself i
would do in this interview is to really
figure out like why the [__] does this
all matter like you and that's why i'm
like i'm dancing on this idea of like
you love your wife like there there is a
realm in which you're like the headset
is pretty rad and it's given me amazing
[__] and i'm really having a hard time
like actually stepping outside at the
headset
and so so much of my life is predicated
on the headset it it may not even be
possible to retain
myself which i value i'm assuming right
so i value myself i value this
experience i [__] value my wife right
that's the one that really scares me
right i get so much out of my wife like
i've imagined my wife and i actually had
this conversation one time
like hey a magic genie shows up what do
you wish for and she was like please
don't wish for super intelligence and i
was like why like that's such a rad
option right to be the smartest human
that ever existed and she said if you
did that you'd no longer be in love with
me and i was like [__] you're actually
right
because if you're you wouldn't love any
human anymore like i love my dogs but
not like i love my wife because there's
such a gap in in how we can relate to
each other
so when i think about like
stepping outside of the headset man
you're giving up everything that you
value and that's like really
really trippy now i admit if you told me
hey tom here's like a pill you can take
and it's going to give you a little peek
outside the headset i'd be like
right i'd have to do it i'd have to take
a peek i'd have to see like what
because i don't believe that drugs are
necessarily punching through to some
truth right i don't find myself like
super compelled to do it but
the idea of looking beyond is both
exhilarating and terrifying because of
that loss of the things that i
i am so invested in
yes
i i'm on the same page with you and and
it's you know
interaction with my wife
is one of the greatest pleasures is you
know what makes life meaningful and my
daughter and i've got three grandkids
and and you know my son-in-law
and you know my students my son-in-law
made the list not bad yeah yeah
absolutely yeah yeah jay is a great guy
and
in this case
i'm interacting with other conscious
agents and i'm benefiting so i'm now
going into my theory this is now it
seems impersonal but i'm going back to
the theory
within the framework of the theory
there's a dynamics of conscious agencies
as as conscious agents interact that
they they learn they get new
comprehensions and they create new
agents
so what we're doing in this headset in
terms like we're interacting there's
something new this we're both growing
we're both learning from this experience
we're we come away from a different
and that seems to be part of it if this
kid in the candy store theory of
consciousness
is on the right track
then we're experiencing it right now
we're kids in candy stores we're
exploring and we're wondering what's on
the what's what's on the next shelf of
candy right that's what we're saying
here when we say well i'd love to see
what if i take five or what what happens
what's going on there so that may be you
know what it's really about is that it's
exploration and maybe you know in
meditation one thing that does happen
is
that you get less and less
grasping
of things that you used to be grasping
about
i find that i'm able to to let go of
things that
fears for example but
pictures of myself it's it's it's really
in some sense of dismantling
the the best metaphor i can come up with
is i read
some time that when a caterpillar goes
through metamorphosis right goes into a
cocoon
the this the immune cells of the
caterpillar
try to kill and they do kill the cells
that are trying to
begin the process of transformation into
a butterfly
and for a while the immune cells of the
caterpillar it's a battle and but
eventually the immune cells of the
caterpillar get overwhelmed
and then much of the caterpillar
liquefies
now that can't be fun
right i mean i mean
liquefaction i mean that it all the
structures that were everything that you
knew as a caterpillar are turning into
goo
and no wonder your immune system is
fighting that tooth and nail until your
immune system gets overwhelmed but
finally the immune system gets
overwhelmed
most of the structure of the caterpillar
turns into goo
and then the transformation happens
that's what meditation feels like to me
which means it's it's a double-edged
kind of thing it's it's both extremely
painful because
everything that i know
and have been connected to and addicted
to is dissolving but on the other hand
i'm realizing wait well that wasn't
absolutely that essential i thought it
was essential but it's not and there's a
new kind of structure that's being built
that i have no idea caterpillar can't
figure out what the butterfly's gonna be
presumably
and so
maybe that's what it's like
to be starting to change headsets
maybe that's maybe meditation is a way
of letting go of some of the
the restrictive trappings of one headset
and upgrading right you're getting the
3.0 now you just had the 2.0 now it's
3.0 i don't know
but but these are the kinds of things i
do want to explore within the
mathematics and that's why i'm sort of
it all fits it doesn't mean it's right
but it all fits the kid in the candy
store my own
kid
anticipation of seeing what's next it
does fit maybe that's why i like the kid
in the candy store theory just that's
just me and you know for other people
that's that's not what it's about but i
think all of us
do wonder um about what's next
and
why are we here and what is it about
that's why i mean that's one reason i do
this is it life is very very short
i want to explore
and things that
most of what i've believed very deeply
has been very deeply wrong
most of what humanity has believed very
deeply has been very deeply wrong
we have a very good we're almost about
100 percent
consistent in being deeply wrong
we've believed
that space time is fundamental
almost everybody believes that space
time is fundamental we all believe the
earth is flat now a few and very
advanced
physicists ed whitton has said space
time is doomed david gross has said it's
in doomed neymar connie ahmed is saying
space time is doomed and these guys
especially nema are now really
being adventurous very very brave and
saying let's go
outside of space and time
into a world where we can't think just
imagine what they're trying to do we're
trying to think
entirely
outside space and time
like as you said as a kid you're going
what could possibly be on the other side
of space and time
these guys are saying not only is there
something on the side i need to think
deeply about it and here's a
mathematical structure in which space
and time
quantum mechanics and unitarily don't
even appear in the language
and then i'll show you how
our headset they don't call it headset
that's now me
add living for them
so how space and time which i'm calling
headset how space and time and quantum
mechanics and general relativity appear
from these deeper structures in which
there's no space in no time
so that fits perfectly with what what
i'm saying now they have no idea what
this deeper structure is about and
what i'm up to is i'm actually nema gave
a class
at harvard last fall
more than 20 lectures on
for graduate students on these deeper
structures outside of space and time
i am taking this class on my own there's
all on youtube so i'm just studying it
i'm transcribing these lectures studying
them because i believe
that i can show with my team my
mathematicians so they'll show
that the long-term behavior of this
dynamics of consciousness that we're
working on what we call the asymptotic
behavior
will give rise to the structures he's
seeing like his amplitude
and so the reason why and then the
amplitude and he already shows how to
build up space time from that
that way i'll be able to go all the way
from conscious agents through the
long-term behavior of conscious agents
through the amplitude and to space-time
i can show you how the headset is built
that's my goal and so i'm i'm really
quite excited once i get
you know i know enough to be worth his
time i may
talk with him but but i'm not going to
waste his time until i know enough so
i'm trying to figure out how the headset
is built once we if we succeed
we'll be able to reverse engineer that
headset
and the technologies we'll we'll be able
to play with the parameters of space
time
so it's like suppose you're you know a
wizard at grand theft auto and you can
play within the game do all sorts of
things that people find amazing that's
great but imagine someone who actually
knows the source code they can take the
wizard and they can give him a flat tire
they can take all the gas out of his
tank they can make the road infinitely
long they can do whatever they want to
they can play with the very parameters
so the wizard is nothing all of our
science right now has made us wizards
we're eventually going to get the source
code of the game there's literally a
book called off to be the wizard about
somebody who realizes this is all source
code and he can go in and edit the code
wow that is uh wow you should check that
out
donald thank you so much this has been
absolutely thrilling reading your book
listening to your interviews and now
spending time with you is amazing i am
now going to think of myself as the
caterpillar fighting off the butterfly
that was amazing i love that uh you've
liquefied my brain and i hope that on
the other side is a butterfly but uh who
knows thank you so much for joining us
it was a great pleasure tom thank you so
much you got it man all right everybody
that was it thank you for joining us
conversation with tom there it is if you
made it this far you are my hero peace
out
[Music]
that's going to be the thing that opens
up
so much not only in terms of our ability
to experience the world to get out of
the narrow you know viewpoint that we're
in and be able to open up to other
things
but it'll also teach us a lot about how
the brain constructs
qualia and
how we how we have our experiences in
the world
you